
At that time souls were filled with enthusiasm when
they gave themselves up to the severe and sober
sport of ideas, generalisations, refutations, that
enthusiasm which
perhaps those old, great, severe,
and prudent contrapuntists in music have also
known. At that time the Greek
palate still possessed that older and
formerly omnipotent taste :
and by the side of this taste their new taste appeared
to be enveloped in so much charm that the divine
art of dialectic was
sung by hesitating voices as if
its followers were intoxicated with the
frenzy of
love. That old form of
thinking, however, was
thought within the bounds of morality, and for it
nothing existed but fixed judgments and established
facts, and it had no reasons but those of
authority. Thinking, therefore, was simply a matter
of
repetition, and all the enjoyment of speech and
dialogue could only lie in their form.
Wherever the substance of a
thing is looked upon
as eternal and
universally approved, there is only
one great charm, the charm of variable forms, that
is, of fashion. Even in the poets ever since the 375
time of Homer, and later on in the case of the sculptors, the Greeks did not enjoy originality, but its
contrary. It was Socrates who discovered another
charm, that of cause and effect, of reason and
sequence, and we moderns have become so used to
it, and have been brought up to the necessity of
logic that we look upon it as the normal taste, and
as such it cannot but be repugnant to ardent and
presumptuous people. Such people are pleased
by whatever stands out boldly from the normal :
their more subtle ambitiort leads them to believe
only too readily that they are exceptional souls,
not dialectic and rational
beings, but, let us say,
"
intuitive
"
beings gifted with an " inner sense," or
with a certain " intellectual
perception." Above all,
however, they wish to be " artistic natures " with a
genius in their heads, and a demon in their bodies,
and consequently with special rights in this world
and in the world to come
especially the divine
privilege of being incomprehensible.
And
people like these are " going in for " philosophy nowadays ! I fear they will discover one
day that they have made a mistake what they
are looking for is religion !
545-
BUT WE DO NOT BELIEVE YOU. You would
fain
pass for psychologists, but we shall not allow
it ! Are we not to notice that
you pretend to be
more experienced, profound, passionate, and perfect
than
you actually are ? just as we notice in yonder
painter that there is a trifling presumptuousness in3/6 
his manner of wielding the brush, and in yonder
musician that he brings forward his theme with the
desire to make it
appear superior to what it really
is. Have
you experienced history within yourselves, commotions, earthquakes, long and profound sadness, and sudden flashes of happiness ?
Have
you acted foolishly with great and little fools ?
Have
you really undergone the delusions and woe
of the good people? and also the woe and the
peculiar happiness of the most evil ? Then you
may speak to me of morality, but not otherwise !
546.
SLAVE AND IDEALIST. The followers of Epictetus would doubtless not be to the taste of those
who are now
striving after the ideal. The constant
tension of his
being, the indefatigable inward glance,
the prudent and reserved incommunicativeness of
his
eye whenever it happens to gaze upon the outer
world, and above all, his silence or laconic speech :
all these are characteristics of the strictest fortitude,
and what would our
idealists, who above all else
are desirous of expansion, care for this ? But in
spite of all this the Stoic is not fanatical. He
detests the display and boasting of our idealists :
his
pride, however great it may be, is not eager
to disturb others. It permits of a certain gentle
approach, and has no desire to spoil anybody's good
humour
nay, it can even smile. A great deal of
ancient humanity is to be seen exemplified in this
ideal. The most excellent feature about
it, however, is that the thinker is completely free from the 377
fear of God, strictly believes in reason, and is no
preacher of penitence.
Epictetus was a slave : his ideal man is without
any particular rank, and may exist in any grade of
society, but above all he is to be sought in the
deepest and lowest social classes, as the silent and
self-sufficient man in the midst of a general state
of servitude, a man who defends himself alone
against the outer world, and is constantly living in
a state of the highest fortitude. He is distinguished
from the Christian especially,because the latter lives
in hope in the promise of " unspeakable glory,"
permits presents to be made to him, and expects
and
accepts the best things from divine love and
grace, and not from himself. Epictetus, on the
other hand, neither hopes nor allows his best
treasure to be given him he possesses it already,
holds it bravely in his hand, and defies the world
to take it
away from him. Christianity was devised
for another class of ancient slaves, for those who
had a weak will and weak reason that is to
say,
for the majority of slaves.
547-
THE TYRANTS OF THE INTELLECT. The
progress of science is at the present time no longer
hindered by the purely accidental fact that man
attains to about
seventy years, which was the case
far too
long. In former times people wished to
master the entire extent of knowledge within this
period, and all the methods of knowledge were
valued according to this general desire. Minor378 
questions and individual experiments were looked
upon as unworthy of notice : people wanted to take
the shortest path under the impression that, since
everything in this world seemed to be arranged
with a view to man's needs, even the acquirement
of knowledge was regulated in view of the limits
of human life.
To solve
everything at a single stroke, with one
word this was the secret desire
;
and the task was
represented in the symbol of the Gordian knot or
the
egg of Columbus. No one doubted that it was
possible to reach the goal of knowledge after the
manner of Alexander or Columbus, and to settle
all questions with one answer. " There is a mystery
to be solved," seemed to be the aim of life in the
eyes of the philosopher : it was necessary in the first
place to find out what this enigma was, and to condense the problem of the world into the simplest
enigmatical formula possible. The boundless ambition and
delight of being the " unraveller of the
world " charmed the dreams of
many a thinker :
nothing seemed to him worth troubling about in
this world but the means of bringing everything to
a satisfactory conclusion. Philosophy thus became
a kind of
supreme struggle for the tyrannical sway
over the intellect, and no one doubted that such a
tyrannical domination was reserved for some very
happy, subtle, ingenious, bold, and powerful person
a single individual ! and many (the last was
Schopenhauer) fancied themselves to be this privileged person.
From this it follows that, on the whole, science
has
up to the present remained in a rather back- 379
ward state owing to the moral narrow-mindedness
of its disciples, and that henceforth it will have to
be pursued from a higher and more generous motive.
" What do I matter ? " is written over the door of
the thinker of the future.
548
VICTORY OVER POWER. If we consider all that
has been venerated
up to the present as " superhuman intellect " or "
genius," we must come to the
sad conclusion that, considered as a whole, the intellectuality of mankind must have been extremely
low and
poor: so little mind has hitherto been
necessary in order to feel at once considerably
superior to all this ! Alas for the cheap glory of
"
genius
"
! How
quickly has it been raised to the
throne, and its worship grown into a custom ! We
still fall on our knees before
power according to
the old custom of slaves and nevertheless, when
the degree of venerability comes to be determined,
only the degree of reason in the power will be the
deciding factor. We must find out, indeed, to how
great an extent power has been overcome by something higher, which it now obeys as a tool and
instrument.
As
yet, however, there have been too few eyes
for such
investigations : even in the majority of
cases the mere valuation of genius has almost been
looked
upon as blasphemy. And thus perhaps
everything that is most beautiful still takes place in
the midst of darkness and vanishes in endless
night
almost as soon as it has made its
appearance,380 
I refer to the spectacle of that power which a genius
does not lay out upon works, but upon himself as
a work, that is, his own self-control, the purifying
of his own imagination, the order and selection in
his inspirations and tasks. The great man ever
remains invisible in the
greatest thing that claims
worship, like some distant star : his victory over
power remains without witnesses, and hence also
without
songs and singers. The hierarchy of the
great men in all the past history of the human race
has not
yet been determined.
549.
FLIGHT FROM ONE'S SELF. Those sufferers
from intellectual
spasms who are impatient towards
themselves and look
upon themselves with a gloomy
eye such as Byron or Alfred de Musset and who,
in everything that they do, resemble runaway horses,
and from their own works derive
only a transient
joy and an ardent passion which almost bursts their
veins, followed by sterility and disenchantment
how are
they able to bear up ! They would fain
attain to something " beyond themselves." If we
happen to be Christians, and are seized by such a
desire as this, we strive to reach God and to become
one with Him
;
if we are a Shakespeare we shall
be glad to perish in images of a passionate life ; if
we are like Byron we long for actions, because these
detach us from ourselves to an even
greater extent
than thoughts, feelings, and works.
And should the desire for
performing great deeds
really be at bottom nothing but a flight from our
own selves ? as Pascal would ask us. And indeed 381
this assertion might be proved by considering the
most noble representations of this desire for action :
in this respect let us remember, bringing the knowledge of an alienist to our aid, that four of the
greatest men of all ages who were possessed of this
lust for action were epileptics Alexander the
Great, Caesar, Mohammed, and Napoleon ; and
Byron likewise was subject to the same complaint.
550.
KNOWLEDGE AND BEAUTY. If men, as they
are still in the habit of doing, reserve their veneration and
feelings of happiness for works of fancy
and
imagination, we should not be surprised if they
feel chilled and
displeased by the contrary of fancy
and
imagination. The rapture which arises from
even the smallest, sure, and definite step in advance
into
insight, and which our present state of science
yields to so many in such abundance this rapture
is in the meantime not believed in by all those who
are in the habit of
feeling enraptured only when
they leave reality altogether and plunge into the
depths of vague appearance romanticism. These
people look upon reality as ugly, but they entirely
overlook the fact that the knowledge of even the
ugliest reality is beautiful, and that the man who
can discern much and often is in the end
very far
from
considering as ugly the main items of that
reality, the discovery of which has always inspired
him with the
feeling of happiness.
Is there anything "beautiful in itself"? The
happiness of those who can recognise augments the
beauty of the world, bathing everything that exists382 
in a sunnier
light : discernment not only envelops
all things in its own beauty, but in the long run
permeates the things themselves with its beauty
may ages to come bear witness to the truth of this
statement ! In the meantime let us recall an old
experience: two men so thoroughly different in
every respect as Plato and Aristotle were agreed
in regard to what constituted superior happiness
not merely their own and that of men in general,
but happiness in itself, even the happiness of the
gods. They found this happiness to lie in knowledge, in the activity of a well practised and inventive understanding (not in " intuition " like the
German
theologians and semi-theologians ; not in
visions, like the mystics ; and not in work, like the
merely practical men). Similar opinions were expressed by Descartes and Spinoza. What great
delight must all these men have felt in knowledge !
and how
great was the danger that their honesty
might give way, and that they themselves might
become
panegyrists of things !
SSIFUTURE VIRTUES. How has it come about
that, the more intelligible the world has become,
the more all kinds of ceremonies have diminished ?
Was fear so
frequently the fundamental basis of
that awe which overcame us at the
sight of anything hitherto unknown and mysterious, and which
taught us to fall upon our knees before the unintelligible, and to beg for mercy? And has the
world, perhaps, through the very fact that we have 383
grown less timid, lost some of the charms it
formerly had for us ? Is it not possible that our
own dignity and stateliness, our formidable character, has decreased together with our spirit of
dread? Perhaps we value the world and ourselves less highly since we have begun to think
more boldly about it and ourselves ? Perhaps there
will come a moment in the future when this courageous spirit of thinking will have reached such a
point that it will feel itself soaring in supreme pride,
far above men and
things when the wise man,
being also the boldest, will see himself, and even
more particularly existence, the lowest of all beneath himself?
This
type of courage, which is not far removed
from excessive
generosity, has been lacking in
humanity up to the present. Oh, that our poets
might once again become what they once were :
seers, telling us something about what might
possibly happen ! now that what is real and what
is past are being ever more and more taken from
them, and must continue to be taken from them
for the time of innocent
counterfeiting is at an
end ! Let them
try to enable us to anticipate
future virtues, or virtues that will never be found
on earth, although they may exist somewhere in
the world !
purple-glowing constellations and
whole Milky Ways of the beautiful 1 Where are
ye, ye astronomers of the ideal ?
552.
IDEAL SELFISHNESS. Is there a more sacred
state than that of
pregnancy ? To perform every384 
one of our actions in the silent conviction that in
one
way or another it will be to the benefit of that
which is
being generated within us that it must
augment its mysterious value, the very thought of
which fills us with
rapture ? At such a time we
refrain from
many things without having to force
ourselves to do so : we
suppress the angry word,
we
grasp the hand forgivingly ; our child must be
born from all that is best and
gentlest. We shun
our own harshness and
brusqueness in case it should
instil a drop of unhappiness into the cup of the
beloved unknown. Everything is veiled, ominous ;
we know
nothing about what is going on, but
simply wait and try to be prepared. During this
time, too, we experience a pure and purifying feeling of profound irresponsibility, similar to that felt
by a spectator before a drawn curtain ; it is growing, it is coming to light ; we have nothing to do
with
determining its value, or the hour of its arrival.
We are thrown back
altogether upon indirect,
beneficent and defensive influences. " Something
greater than we are is growing here " such is our
most secret hope : we prepare everything with a
view to his birth and
prosperity not merely everything that is useful, but also the noblest gifts of our
souls.
We should, and can, live under the influence of
such a blessed
inspiration ! Whether what we are
looking forward to is a thought or a deed, our
relationship to every essential achievement is none
other than that of
pregnancy, and all our vainglorious boasting about " willing " and " creating "
should be cast to the winds 1 True and ideal 38$
selfishness consists in always watching over and
restraining the soul, so that our productiveness may
come to a beautiful termination. Thus in this
indirect manner we must provide for and watch
over the good of all ; and the frame of mind, the
mood in which we live, is a kind of soothing oil
which spreads far around" us on the restless souls.
Still, these pregnant ones are funny people!
let us therefore dare to be funny also, and not
reproach others if they must be the same. And
even when this phenomenon becomes dangerous
and evil we must not show less
respect to that which
is generating within us or others than ordinary
worldly justice, which does not allow the judge or
the hangman to interfere with a pregnant woman.
553-
CIRCUITOUS ROUTES. Where does all this
philosophy mean to end with its circuitous routes ?
Does it do more than
transpose into reason, so to
speak, a continuous and strong impulse a craving
for a mild
sun, a bright and bracing atmosphere,
southern
plants, sea breezes, short meals of meat,
eggs, and fruit, hot water to drink, quiet walks for
days at a time, little talking, rare and cautious
reading, living alone, pure, simple, and almost
soldier-like habits a
craving, in short, for all
things which are suited to my own personal taste ?
a philosophy which is in the main the instinct for
a personal regimen an instinct that longs for my
air, my height, my temperature, and my kind of
health, and takes the circuitous route of my head
to persuade me to it !
2B386 
There are
many other and certainly more lofty
philosophies, and not only such as are more gloomy
and
pretentious than mine and are they perhaps,
taking them as a whole, nothing but intellectual
circuitous routes of the same kind of personal impulses? In the meantime I look with a new eye
upon the mysterious and solitary flight of a butterfly high on the rocky banks of the lake where so
many plants are growing : there it flies hither and
thither, heedless of the fact that its life will last
only one more day, and that the night will be too
cold for its winged fragility. For it, too, a philosophy might be found, though it might not be
my own.
554-
LEADING.* When we
praise progress we only
praise the movement and those who do not let us
remain on the same
spot, and in the circumstances
this is certainly something, especially if we live
among Egyptians. In changeable Europe, however, where movement is " understood," to use their
own expression, " as a matter of course " alas, if
we only understood something about it too ! I
praise leaders and forerunners : that is to say, those
who
always leave themselves behind, and do not
care in the least whether
any one is following them
or not. " Wherever I halt I find myself alone :
why should I halt ! the desert is still so wide ! "
such is the sentiment of the true leader.
* The
play upon the words Vorschritt (leading) and
Fortschritt (progress) cannot be rendered in English. TR. 387
555-
THE LEAST IMPORTANT ARE SUFFICIENT.
We
ought to avoid events when we know that even
the least important of them frequently enough leave
a strong impression upon us and these we cannot
avoid. The thinker must
possess an approximate
canon of all the things he still wishes to experience.
556.
THE FOUR VIRTUES. Honest towards ourselves, and to all and everything friendly to us ;
brave in the face of our
enemy ; generous towards
the vanquished ; polite at all times : such do the
four cardinal virtues wish us to be.
557-
MARCHING AGAINST AN ENEMY. How
pleasant is the sound of even bad music and bad motives
when we are
setting out to march against an
enemy !
558.
NOT CONCEALING ONE'S VIRTUES. I love
those men who are as
transparent as water, and
who, to use Pope's expression, hide not from view
the turbid bottom of their stream. Even
they, however, possess a certain vanity, though of a rare and
more sublimated kind : some of them would wish
us to see nothing but the mud, and to take no
notice of the clearness of the water which enables
us to look
right to the bottom. No less a man than388 
Gautama Buddha has imagined the vanity of these
few in the formula, " Let your sins appear before
men, and conceal your virtues." But this would
exhibit a disagreeable spectacle to the world it
would be a sin
against good taste.
559-
"NOTHING IN EXCESS!" How often is the
individual recommended to set
up a goal which it
is beyond his power to reach, in order that he may
at least attain that which lies within the
scope of
his abilities and most strenuous efforts ! Is it
really
so desirable, however, that he should do so ? Do
not the best men who
try to act according to this
doctrine, together with their, best deeds, necessarily
assume a somewhat
exaggerated and distorted appearance on account of their excessive tension ? and
in the future will not a
grey mist of failure envelop
the world, owing to the fact that we may see everywhere struggling athletes and tremendous gestures,
but nowhere a
conqueror crowned with the laurel,
and
rejoicing in his victory 