PREFACE


1

As it is my intention within a very short time to confront my
fellow-men with the very greatest demand that has ever yet been made
upon them, it seems to me _above_ all necessary to declare here who
and what I am. As a matter of fact, this ought to be pretty well
known already, for I have not "held my tongue" about myself. But
the disparity which obtains between the greatness of my task and the
smallness of my contemporaries, is revealed by the fact that people
have neither heard me nor yet seen me. I live on my own self-made
credit, and it is probably only a prejudice to suppose that I am alive
at all. I do but require to speak to any one of the scholars who come
to the Ober-Engadine in the summer in order to convince myself that I
am _not_ alive.... Under these circumstances, it is a duty--and one
against which my customary reserve, and to a still greater degree the
pride of my instincts, rebel--to say: _Listen! for I am such and such a
person. For Heaven's sake do not confound me with any one else!_



2

I am, for instance, in no wise a bogey man, or moral monster. On the
contrary, I am the very opposite in nature to the kind of man that
has been honoured hitherto as virtuous. Between ourselves, it seems
to me that this is precisely a matter on which I may feel proud. I
am a disciple of the philosopher Dionysus, and I would prefer to be
even a satyr than a saint. But just read this book! Maybe I have here
succeeded in expressing this contrast in a cheerful and at the same
time sympathetic manner--maybe this is the only purpose of the present
work.

The very last thing I should promise to accomplish would be to
"improve" mankind. I do not set up any new idols; may old idols only
learn what it costs to have legs of clay. To overthrow idols (idols
is the name I give to all ideals) is much more like my business. In
proportion as an ideal world has been falsely assumed, reality has been
robbed of its value, its meaning, and its truthfulness.... The "true
world" and the "apparent world"--in plain English, the fictitious world
and reality.... Hitherto the _lie_ of the ideal has been the curse of
reality; by means of it the very source of mankind's instincts has
become mendacious and false; so much so that those values have come to
be worshipped which are the exact _opposite_ of the ones which would
ensure man's prosperity, his future, and his great right to a future.



3

He who knows how to breathe in the air of my writings is conscious
that it is the air of the heights, that it is bracing. A man must be
built for it, otherwise the chances are that it will chill him. The
ice is near, the loneliness is terrible--but how serenely everything
lies in the sunshine! how freely one can breathe! how much, one feels,
lies beneath one! Philosophy, as I have understood it hitherto, is
a voluntary retirement into regions of ice and mountain-peaks--the
seeking--out of everything strange and questionable in existence,
everything upon which, hitherto, morality has set its ban. Through
long experience, derived from such wanderings in forbidden country, I
acquired an opinion very different from that which may seem generally
desirable, of the causes which hitherto have led to men's moralising
and idealising. The secret history of philosophers, the psychology of
their great names, was revealed to me. How much truth can a certain
mind endure; how much truth can it dare?--these questions became for
me ever more and more the actual test of values. Error (the belief in
the ideal) is not blindness; error is cowardice.... Every conquest,
every step forward in knowledge, is the outcome of courage, of hardness
towards one's self, of cleanliness towards one's self. I do not refute
ideals; all I do is to draw on my gloves in their presence.... _Nitimur
in vetitum;_ with this device my philosophy will one day be victorious;
for that which has hitherto been most stringently forbidden is, without
exception, Truth.



4

In my lifework, my _Zarathustra_ holds a place apart. With it, I gave
my fellow-men the greatest gift that has ever been bestowed upon them.
This book, the voice of which speaks out across the ages, is not only
the loftiest book on earth, literally the book of mountain air,--the
whole phenomenon, mankind, lies at an incalculable distance beneath
it,--but it is also the deepest book, born of the inmost abundance of
truth; an inexhaustible well, into which no pitcher can be lowered
without coming up again laden with gold and with goodness. Here it is
not a "prophet" who speaks, one of those gruesome hybrids of sickness
and Will to Power, whom men call founders of religions. If a man would
not do a sad wrong to his wisdom, he must, above all give proper
heed to the tones--the halcyonic tones--that fall from the lips of
Zarathustra:--

"The most silent words are harbingers of the storm; thoughts that come
on dove's feet lead the world.

"The figs fall from the trees; they are good and sweet, and, when they
fall, their red skins are rent.

"A north wind am I unto ripe figs.

"Thus, like figs, do these precepts drop down to you, my friends; now
drink their juice and their sweet pulp.

"It is autumn all around, and clear sky, and afternoon."

No fanatic speaks to you here; this is not a "sermon"; no faith is
demanded in these pages. From out an infinite treasure of light and
well of joy, drop by drop, my words fall out--a slow and gentle gait
is the cadence of these discourses. Such things can reach only the
most elect; it is a rare privilege to be a listener here; not every?
one who likes can have ears to hear Zarathustra. I Is not Zarathustra,
because of these things, a _seducer?_ ... But what, indeed, does he
himself say, when for the first time he goes back to his solitude? Just
the reverse of that which any "Sage," "Saint," "Saviour of the world,"
and other decadent would say.... Not only his words, but he himself is
other than they.

"Alone do I now go, my disciples! Get ye also hence, and alone! Thus
would I have it.

"Verily, I beseech you: take your leave of me and arm yourselves
against Zarathustra! And better still, be ashamed of him! Maybe he hath
deceived you.

"The knight of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies, but
also to hate his friends.

"The man who remaineth a pupil requiteth his teacher but ill. And why
would ye not pluck at my wreath?

"Ye honour me; but what if your reverence should one day break down?
Take heed, lest a statue crush you.

"Ye say ye believe in Zarathustra? But of; what account is Zarathustra?
Ye are my believers: but of what account are all believers?

"Ye had not yet sought yourselves when ye found me. Thus do all
believers; therefore is all believing worth so little.

"Now I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when ye have all
denied me will I come back unto you."

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.





On this perfect day, when everything is ripening, and not only the
grapes are getting brown, a ray of sunshine has fallen on my life: I
looked behind me, I looked before me, and never have I seen so many
good things all at once. Not in vain have I buried my four-and-fortieth
year to-day; I had the _right_ to bury it--that in it which still
had life, has been saved and is immortal. The first book of the
_Transvaluation of all Values, The Songs of Zarathustra, The Twilight
of the Idols,_ my attempt, to philosophise with the hammer--all these
things are the gift of this year, and even of its last quarter. _How
could I help being thankful to the whole of my life?_

That is why I am now going to tell myself the story of my life.




ECCE HOMO


HOW ONE BECOMES WHAT ONE IS




WHY I AM SO WISE



1


The happiness of my existence, its unique character perhaps, consists
in its fatefulness: to speak in a riddle, as my own father I am already
dead, as my own mother I still live and grow old. This double origin,
taken as it were from the highest and lowest rungs of the ladder of
life, at once a decadent and a beginning, this, if anything, explains
that neutrality, that freedom from partisanship in regard to the
general problem of existence, which perhaps distinguishes me. To the
first indications of ascending or of descending life my nostrils are
more sensitive than those of any man that has yet lived. In this domain
I am a master to my backbone--I know both sides, for I am both sides.
My father died in his six-and-thirtieth year: he was delicate, lovable,
and morbid, like one who is preordained to pay simply a flying visit--a
gracious reminder of life rather than life itself. In the same year
that his life declined mine also declined: in my six-and-thirtieth year
I reached the lowest point in my vitality,--I still lived, but my eyes
could distinguish nothing that lay three paces away from me. At that
time--it was the year 1879--I resigned my professorship at Bâle, lived
through the summer like a shadow in St. Moritz, and spent the following
winter, the most sunless of my life, like a shadow in Naumburg. This
was my lowest ebb. During this period I wrote _The Wanderer and His
Shadow._ Without a doubt I was conversant with shadows then. The winter
that followed, my first winter in Genoa, brought forth that sweetness
and spirituality which is almost inseparable from extreme poverty
of blood and muscle, in the shape of _The Dawn of Day,_ The perfect
lucidity and cheerfulness, the intellectual exuberance even, that this
work reflects, coincides, in my case, not only with the most profound
physiological weakness, but also with an excess of suffering. In the
midst of the agony of a headache which lasted three days, accompanied
by violent nausea, I was possessed of most singular dialectical
clearness, and in absolutely cold blood I then thought out things, for
which, in my more healthy moments, I am not enough of a climber, not
sufficiently subtle, not sufficiently cold. My readers perhaps know
to what extent I consider dialectic a symptom of decadence, as, for
instance, in the most famous of all cases--the case of Socrates. All
the morbid disturbances of the intellect, even that semi-stupor which
accompanies fever, have, unto this day, remained completely unknown to
me; and for my first information concerning their nature and frequency,
I was obliged to have recourse to the learned works which have been
compiled on the subject. My circulation is slow. No one has ever been
able to detect fever in me. A doctor who treated me for some time as
a nerve patient finally declared: "No! there is nothing wrong with
your nerves, it is simply I who am nervous." It has been absolutely
impossible to ascertain any local degeneration in me, nor any organic
stomach trouble, however much I may have suffered from profound
weakness of the gastric system as the result of general exhaustion.
Even my eye trouble, which sometimes approached so parlously near
to blindness, was only an effect and not a cause; for, whenever my
general vital condition improved, my power of vision also increased.
Having admitted all this, do I need to say that I am experienced in
questions of decadence? I know them inside and out. Even that filigree
art of prehension and comprehension in general, that feeling for
delicate shades of difference, that psychology of "seeing through brick
walls," and whatever else I may be able to do, was first learnt then,
and is the specific gift of that period during which everything in
me was subtilised,--observation itself, together with all the organs
of observation. To look upon healthier concepts and values from the
standpoint of the sick, and conversely to look down upon the secret
work of the instincts of decadence from the standpoint of him who is
laden and self-reliant with the richness of life--this has been my
longest exercise, my principal experience. If in anything at all, it
was in this that I became a master. To-day my hand knows the trick, I
now have the knack of reversing perspectives: the first reason perhaps
why a _Transvaluation of all Values_ has been possible to me alone.



2


For, apart from the fact that I am a decadent, I am also the reverse of
such a creature. Among other things my proof of this is, that I always
instinctively select the proper remedy when my spiritual or bodily
health is low; whereas the decadent, as such, invariably chooses those
remedies which are bad for him. As a whole I was sound, but in certain
details I was a decadent. That energy with which I sentenced myself
to absolute solitude, and to a severance from all those conditions in
life to which I had grown accustomed; my discipline of myself, and my
refusal to allow myself to be pampered, to be tended hand and foot, and
to be doctored--all this betrays the absolute certainty of my instincts
respecting what at that time was most needful to me. I placed myself
in my own hands, I restored myself to health: the first condition of
success in such an undertaking, as every physiologist will admit, is
that at bottom a man should be sound. An intrinsically morbid nature
cannot become healthy. On the other hand, to an intrinsically sound
nature, illness may even constitute a powerful stimulus to life, to
a surplus of life. It is in this light that I now regard the long
period of illness that I endured: it seemed as if I had discovered
life afresh, my own self included. I tasted all good things and even
trifles in a way in which it was not easy for others to taste them--out
of my Will to Health and to Life I made my philosophy.... For this
should be thoroughly understood; it was during those years in which my
vitality reached its lowest point that I ceased from being a pessimist:
the instinct of self-recovery forbade my holding to a philosophy of
poverty and desperation. Now, by what signs are Nature's lucky strokes
recognised among men? They are recognised by the fact that any such
lucky stroke gladdens our senses; that he is carved from one integral
block, which is hard, sweet, and fragrant as well. He enjoys that only
which is good for him; his pleasure, his desire, ceases when the limits
of that which is good for him are overstepped. He divines remedies for
injuries; he knows how to turn serious accidents to his own advantage;
that which does not kill him makes him stronger. He instinctively
gathers his material from all he sees, hears, and experiences. He is a
selective principle; he rejects much. He is always in his own company,
whether his intercourse be with books, with men, or with natural
scenery; he honours the things he chooses, the things he acknowledges,
the things he trusts. He reacts slowly to all kinds of stimuli, with
that tardiness which long caution and deliberate pride have bred in
him--he tests the approaching stimulus; he would not dream of meeting
it half-way. He believes neither in "ill-luck" nor "guilt"; he can
digest himself and others; he knows how to forget--he is strong enough
to make everything turn to his own advantage.

Lo then! I am the very reverse of a decadent, for he whom I have just
described is none other than myself.



3


This double thread of experiences, this means of access to two worlds
that seem so far asunder, finds in every detail its counterpart in my
own nature--I am my own complement: I have a "second" sight, as well
as a first. And perhaps I also have a third sight. By the very nature
of my origin I was allowed an outlook beyond all merely local, merely
national and limited horizons; it required no effort on my part to be
a "good European." On the other hand, I am perhaps more German than
modern Germans--mere Imperial Germans--can hope to be,--I, the last
anti-political German. Be this as it may, my ancestors were Polish
noblemen: it is owing to them that I have so much race instinct in my
blood--who knows? perhaps even the _liberum veto_[1] When I think of
the number of times in my travels that I have been accosted as a Pole,
even by Poles themselves, and how seldom I have been taken for a German,
it seems to me as if I belonged to those only who have a sprinkling
of German in them. But my mother, Franziska Oehler, is at any rate
something very German; as is also my paternal grandmother, Erdmuthe
Krause. The latter spent the whole of her youth in good old Weimar,
not without coming into contact with Goethe's circle. Her brother,
Krause, the Professor of Theology in Königsberg, was called to the
post of General Superintendent at Weimar after Herder's death. It is
not unlikely that her mother, my great grandmother, is mentioned in
young Goethe's diary under the name of "Muthgen." She married twice,
and her second husband was Superintendent Nietzsche of Eilenburg.
In 1813, the year of the great war, when Napoleon with his general
staff entered Eilenburg on the 10th of October, she gave birth to a
son. As a daughter of Saxony she was a great admirer of Napoleon, and
maybe I am so still. My father, born in 1813, died in 1849. Previous
to taking over the pastorship of the parish of Röcken, not far from
Lützen, he lived for some years at the Castle of Altenburg, where he
had charge of the education of the four princesses. His pupils are the
Queen of Hanover, the Grand-Duchess Constantine, the Grand-Duchess of
Oldenburg, and the Princess Theresa of Saxe-Altenburg. He was full of
loyal respect for the Prussian King, Frederick William the Fourth, from
whom he obtained his living at Röcken; the events of 1848 saddened him
extremely. As I was born on the 15 th of October, the birthday of the
king above mentioned, I naturally received the Hohenzollern names of
Frederick William. There was at all events one advantage in the choice
of this day: my birthday throughout the whole of my childhood was a day
of public rejoicing. I regard it as a great privilege to have had such
a father: it even seems to me that this embraces all that I can claim
in the matter of privileges--life, the great yea to life, excepted.
What I owe to him above all is this, that I do not need any special
intention, but merely a little patience, in order involuntarily to
enter a world of higher and more delicate things. There I am at home,
there alone does my inmost passion become free. The fact that I had
to pay for this privilege almost with my life, certainly does not
make it a bad bargain. In order to understand even a little of _my
Zarathustra,_ perhaps a man must be situated and constituted very much
as I am myself--with one foot beyond the realm of the living.



4


I have never understood the art of arousing ill-feeling against
myself,--this is also something for which I have to thank my
incomparable father,--even when it seemed to me highly desirable
to do so. However un-Christian it may seem, I do not even bear any
ill-feeling towards myself. Turn my life about as you may, you will
find but seldom--perhaps indeed only once--any trace of some one's
having shown me ill-will. You might perhaps discover, however, too
many traces of _goodwill...._ My experiences even with those on whom
every other man has burnt his fingers, speak without exception in their
favour; I tame every bear, I can make even clowns behave decently.
During the seven years in which I taught Greek to the sixth form of
the College at Bâle, I never had occasion to administer a punishment;
the laziest youths were diligent in my class. The unexpected has
always found me equal to it; I must be unprepared in order to keep my
self-command. Whatever the instrument was, even if it were as out of
tune as the instrument "man" can possibly be,--it was only when I was
ill that I could not succeed in making it express something that was
worth hearing. And how often have I not been told by the "instruments"
themselves, that they had never before heard their voices express such
beautiful things.... This was said to me most delightfully perhaps by
that young fellow Heinrich von Stein, who died at such an unpardonably
early age, and who, after having considerately asked leave to do
so, once appeared in Sils-Maria for a three days' sojourn, telling
everybody there that it was _not_ for the Engadine that he had come.
This excellent person, who with all the impetuous simplicity of a
young Prussian nobleman, had waded deep into the swamp of Wagnerism
(and into that of Dübringism[2] into the bargain!), seemed almost
transformed during these three days by a hurricane of freedom, like one
who has been suddenly raised to his full height and given wings. Again
and again I said to him that this was all owing to the splendid air;
everybody felt the same,--one could not stand 6000 feet above Bayreuth
for nothing,--but he would not believe me.... Be this as it may, if
I have been the victim of many a small or even great offence, it was
not "will," and least of all ill-will that actuated the offenders; but
rather, as I have already suggested, it was goodwill, the cause of no
small amount of mischief in f my life, about which I had to complain.
_My_ experience gave me a right to feel suspicious in regard to all
so-called "unselfish" instincts, in regard to the whole of "neighbourly
love" which is ever ready and waiting with deeds or with advice. To
me it seems that these instincts are a sign of weakness, they are an
example of the inability to withstand a stimulus--it is only among
decadents that this _pity_ is called a virtue. What I reproach the
pitiful with is, that they are too ready to forget shame, reverence,
and the delicacy of feeling which knows how to keep at a distance; they
do not remember that this gushing pity stinks of the mob, and that it
is next of kin to bad manners--that pitiful hands may be thrust with
results fatally destructive into a great destiny, into a lonely and
wounded retirement, and into the privileges with which great guilt
endows one. The overcoming of pity I reckon among the noble virtues;
In the "Temptation of Zarathustra" I have imagined a case, in which a
great cry of distress reaches his ears, in which pity swoops down upon
him like a last sin, and would make him break faith with himself. To
remain one's own master in such circumstances, to keep the sublimity
of one's mission pure in such cases,--pure from the many ignoble and
more short-sighted impulses which come into play in so-called unselfish
actions,--this is the rub, the last test perhaps which a Zarathustra
has to undergo--the actual proof of his power.


