PREFACE
So far as outsiders are concerned, we are satisfied to know their aims, accepting or rejecting
them in toto. But in the case of people close to
us, we judge them according to the methods with
which they pursue their aims. Often we may disapprove of their aims but love them because of
their ways and the nature of their intentions.
Now philosophical systems are wholly true for
their founders only. For all subsequent philosophers they usually represent one great mistake,
for lesser minds a sum of errors and truths. Taken
as ultimate ends, in any event, they represent an
error, hence are to be repudiated. Many people
disapprove of all philosophers because philosophers' aims differ too much from their own.
They are outsiders to one another. On the other
hand. whoever rejoices in great human beings
will also rejoice in philosophical systems, even if
completely erroneous. They always have one
wholly incontrovertible point: personal mood,
color. They may be used to reconstruct the philosophic image, just as one may guess at the
nature of the soil in a given place by studying a
plant that grows there. "So this has existedonce, at least-ann is therefore a possibility, this
way of life, this way of looking at the human scene." The "system" is a growth of this soil, or
at least a part of this system . . .
I am going to tell the story-simplified-of
certain philosophers. I am going to emphasize
only that point of each of their systems which
constitutes a slice of personality and hence belongs to that incontrovertible, non-debatable
evidence which it is the task of history to preserve. It is meant to be a beginning, by means of
a comparative approach, toward the recovery
and re-creation of certain ancient names, so that
the polyphony of Greek nature at long last may
resound once more. The task is to bring to light
what we must ever love and honor and what no
subsequent enlightenment can take away: great
individual human beings.A LATER PREFACE
This attempt to tell the story of the older
Greek philosophers is distinguished from similar
attempts by its brevity. This has been attained
by mentioning, for each of the philosophers, but
a very small number of doctrines-in other
words, by its incompleteness. But I have selected
those doctrines which sound most dearly the
personality of the individual philosopher,
whereas the complete enumeration of all the
transmitted doctrines, as it is the custom of the
ordinary handbooks to give, has but one sure
result: the complete silencing of personality.
That is why those reports are so dull. The only
thing of interest in a refuted system is the personal element. It alone is what is forever irrefutable. It is possible to present the image of a man
in three anecdotes; I shall try to emphasize three
anecdotes in each system and abandon the rest.
251
There are people who are opposed to all philosophy and one does well to listen to them, particularly when they advise the diseased minds of
Germans to stay away from metaphysics, instead
preaching purification through physis as Goethe
did. or healing through music, as did RiChard
Wagner. The physicians of our culture repudiate philosophy. Whoever wishes tojustify it must
show. therefore. to what ends.a healthy culture
uses and has used philosophy. Perhaps the sick
will then actually gain salutary insight into why
philosophy is harmful specifically to them. There
are good instances. to be sure, of a type of health
which can exist altogether without philosophy.
or with but a very moderate. almost playful.
exercise of it. The Romans during their best
period lived without philosophy. But where
could we find an instance of cultural pathology
which philosophy restored to health? 1£ philosophy ever manifested itself as helpful, redeeming,
or prophylactic. it was in a healthy culture. The
sick. it made ever sicker. Wherever a culture was
disintegrating, wherever the tension between it
and its individual components was slack, philosophy could never re·integrate the individuals back
into the group. Wherever an individual was of a
mind to stand apart. to draw a circle o£ self·sufZl28 
ficiency about himself, philosophy was ready to
isolate him still further, finally to destroy him
through that isolation. Philosophy is dangerous
wherever it does not exist in its fullest right, and
it is only the health of a culture-and not every
culture at that-which accords it such fullest
right.
And now let us look around for the highest
authority for what we may term cultural health.
The Greeks, with their truly healthy culture,
have once and for all justified philosophy simply
by having engaged in it. and engaged in it more
fully than any other people. They could not even
stop engaging in philosophy at the proper time;
even in their skinny old age they retained the
hectic postures of ancient suitors, even when all
they meant by philosophy was but the pious
sophistries and the sacrosanct hair-splittings of
Christian dogmatics. By the fact that they were
unable to stop in time, they considerably dimin·
ished their merit for barbaric posterity. because
this posterity, in the ignorance and unrestraint
of its youth, was bound to get caught in those
too artfully woven nets and ropes.
On the other hand the Greeks knew precisely
how to begin at the proper time, and the lesson
of how one must start out in philosophy they
demonstrate more plainly than any other people.
Not to wait until a period of aflliction (as those
who derive philosophy from personal moroseness
imagine), but to begin in the midst of good fortune, at the peak of mature manhood, as a pursuit springing from the ardent joyousness of
courageous and victorious maturity. At such aTragic Age of tlie Gl'eeks 29
period of their culture the Greeks engaged in
philosophy, and this teaches us not only what
philosophy is and does, but also gives us information about the Greeks themselves. For if they had
been the sober and precocious technicians and
the cheerful sensates that the learned philistines
of our day imagine they were, or if they had
floated solely in a self-indulgent fog, reverberating with heavy breathings and deep feelings, as
the unscholarly fantasts among us like to assume,
the well-spring of philosophy should never have
seen the light of day in Greece. At most it would
have produced a rivulet soon to lose itself in the
sands or evaporate in a haze. It never could have
become that broad proud stream which we know
as Greek philosophy.
It has been pointed out assiduously, to be
sure, how much the Greeks were able to find and
learn abroad in the Orient, and it is doubtless
true that they picked up much there. It is a
strange spectacle, however, to see the alleged
teachers from the Orient and their Greek disci·
pIes exhibited side by side: Zoroaster next to
Heraclitus, Hindus next to Eleatics, Egyptians
next to Empedocles. or even Anaxagoras amidst
the Jews and Pythagoras amidst the Chinese. As
to specifics. very little has been discovered by
such juxtaposition. As to the general idea. we
should not mind it, if only its exponents did
not burden us with their conclusion that philosophy was thus merely imported into Greece rather
than having grown and developed there in a soil
natural and native to it. Or worse, that philosophy being alien to the Greeks, it very likely con·30 
tributed to their ruin more than to their wellbeing. Nothing would be sillier than to claim an
autochthonous development for the Greeks. On
the contrary, they invariably absorbed other living cultures. The very reason they got so far is
that they knew how to pick up the spear and
throw it onward from the point where others
had left it. Their skill in the art of fruitful learning was admirable. We ought to be learning
from our neighbors precisely as the Greeks
learned from theirs, not for the sake of learned
pedantry but rather using everything we learn
as a foothold which will take us up as high, and
higher than our neighbor. The quest for philosophy's beginnings is idle, for everywhere in all
beginnings we find only the crude, the unformed,
the empty and the ugly. What matters in all
things is the higher levels. People who prefer to
spend their time on Egyptian or Persian philosophy rather than on Greek, on the grounds that
the former are more "original" and in any event
older, are just as ill-advised as those who cannot
deal with the magnificent, profound mythology
of the Greeks until they have reduced it to the
physical trivialities of sun, lightning, storm and
mist which originally presumably gave rise to
it. They are the people, also, who imagine they
have found a purer form of religion than that of
Greek polytheism when they discover the good
old Aryans restricting their worship to the single
vault of heaven. Everywhere, the way to the beginnings leads to barbarism. Whoever concerns
himself with the Greeks should be ever mindful
that an unrestrained thirst for knowledge for its 31
own sake barbarizes men just as much as a hatred
of knowledge. The Greeks themselves, possessed
of an inherently insatiable thirst for knowledge,
controlled it by their ideal need for and con·
sideration of all the values of life. Whatever they
learned. they wanted to live through, immediately. They engaged in philosophy. as in everything else. as civilized human beings. and with
highly civilized aims, wherefore. free of any kind
of autochthonous conceit. they forebore trying
to re-invent the elements of philosophy and science. Rather they instantly tackled the job of so
fulfilling. enhancing. elevating and purifying the
elements they took over from elsewhere that they
became inventors after all. but in a higher sense
and a purer sphere. For what they invented was
the archetypes of philosophic thought. All posterity has not made an essential contribution to
them since.
All other cultures are put to shame by the marvellously idealized philosophical company represented by the ancient Greek masters Thales,
Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Anaxagoras, Empedodes, Democritus and Socrates. These
men are monolithic. Their thinking and their
character stand in a relationship characterized
by strictest necessity. They are devoid of conventionality, for in their day there was no philosophic or academic professionalism. All of them,
in magnificent solitude, were the only ones of
their time whose lives were devoted to insight
alone. They all possessed that virtuous energy of
the ancients, herein excelling all men since,
which led them to find their own individual32 
form and to develop it through all its metamorphoses to its subtlest and greatest possibilities.
For there was no convention to meet them halfway. Thus all of them together form what Schopenhauer in contrast to the republic of scholars
has called the republic of creative minds: each
giant calling to his brother through the desolate
intervals of time. And undisturbed by the wanton noises of the dwarfs that creep past beneath
them, their high spirit-converse continues.
Of this high spirit-converse I have resolved to
tell the story. At least whatever part of it our
modern hardness of hearing can hear and understand-probably a negligible amount. It seems
to me that those ancient wise men. from Thales
through Socrates. have touched in their conversation all those things, albeit in their most generalized form, which to our minds constitutes
typical Hellenism. In their conversation as in
their personalities they form the great·featured
mold of Greek genius whose ghostly print, whose
blurred and less expressive copy. is the whole of
Greek history. If we could interpret correctly the
slim total of Greek culture, all we would find
would be the reflection of the image which shines
forth brightly from its greatest luminaries. The
very first experience that philosophy had on
Greek soil, the sanction of the Seven Sages, is
an unmistakable and unforgettable feature of the
Hellenic image. Other peoples have saints; the
Greeks have sages. It has been rightly said that
a people is characterized not as much by its great
men as by the way in which it recognizes and
honors its great men. In other times and places,Tragic Age of the G)'ecks
the philosopher is a chance wanderer, lonely in
a totally hostile environment which he either
creeps past or attacks with clenched fist. Among
the Greeks alone, he is not an accident. When he
appears in the sixth and fifth centuries, among
the enormous dangers and temptations of increasing secularization, walking as it were out of
the cave of Trophonius straight into the midst
of the lavish luxuriance, the pioneer freedom, the
wealth and sensuality of the Greek colonies, we
may suspect that he comes, a distinguished warning voice. to express the same purpose to which
the tragic drama was born during that century,
and of which the Orphic mysteries hint in the
grotesque hieroglyphics of their rites. The judgment of those philosophers as to life and existence in general means so much more than any
modern judgment, for they had life in lavish perfection before their eyes, whereas the feeling of
our thinkers is confused by our split desire for
freedom, beauty and greatness on the one hand
and our drive toward truth on the other, a drive
which asks merely "And what is life worth, after
am" The philosopher's mission when he lives in
a genuine culture (which is characterized by
unity of style) cannot be properly derived from
our own circumstances and experiences, for we
have no genuine culture. Only a culture such as
the Greeks possessed can answer our question as to
the task of the philosopher. and only it, I repeat,
can justify philosophy at all. because it alone
knows and can demonstrate why and how the
philosopher is not a chance random wanderer,
exiled to this place Of to that. There is a steely84 
necessity which binds a philosopher to a genuine
culture. But what if such a culture does not exist?
Then the philosopher is a comet, incalculable
and therefore terror-inspiring. When all is well,
he shines like a stellar object of the first magnitude in the solar system of culture. That is why
the Greeks justify philosophers. Only among
them, they are not comets.
2
After these reflections I shall presumably be
understood if I speak of the pre-Platonic philosophers as of one homogenous company and plan
to devote this essay to them alone. With Plato,
something entirely new has its beginning. Or it
might be said with equal justice, from Plato on
there is something essentially amiss with philosophers when one compares them to that "republic
of creative minds" from Thales to Socrates.
Whoever wants to point out the disadvantageous aspect of the older masters may call them
one-sided and their posterity, including Plato at
the head, many-sided. But it would be more correct and simple to comprehend the latter as philosophic mixed types. and the former as pure
types. Plato himself is the first mixed type on a
grand scale, expressing his nature in his philosophy no less than in his personality. Socratic.Tragic Age of the Greeks liS
Pythagorean and Heraclitic elements are all combined in his doctrine of Ideas. This doctrine is
not a phenomenon exhibiting a pure philosophic
type. As a human being. too, Plato mingles the
features of the regal exclusive and self-contained
Heraclitus with the melancholy compassionate
and legislative Pythagoras and the psychologically
acute dialectician Socrates. AU subsequent philosophers are such mixed types. Where a certain
one-sidedness is paramount in them. in the Cynics
for example, it is not a type phenomenon but
one of caricature. What is far more important,
however, is that the mixed types were founders
of sects, and that sectarianism with its institutions and counterinstitutions was opposed to Hellenic culture and its previous unity of style. Such
philosophers too sought salvation in their own
way, but only for the individual or for a small
inside group of friends and disciples. The activity of the older philosophers. on the other
hand (though they were quite unconscious of it)
tended toward the healing and the purification
of the whole. It is the mighty flow of Greek culture that shall not be impeded; the terrible dangers in its path shall be cleared away: thus did
the philosopher protect and defend his native
land. But later, beginning with Plato, philosophers became exiles, conspiring against their fatherland.
It is a veritable misfortune that we have so
little extant of the works of the ancient masters
and that not a single one of their works was
handed down to us complete. We are involuntarily influenced by this loss, measuring therefore86 
with false standards, and letting ourselves be disposed more favorably toward Piato and Aristotle
by the sheer accident that they never lacked connoisseurs and copyists. Some go so far as to assume a special destiny reserved for books, a tatum
libellorum. Such a fate would have to be malicious indeed to deprive us of Heraclitus, of the
wonderful poetry of Empedocles, and of the writings of Democritus, thought by the ancients to be
Plato's equal and, so far as ingenuity is concerned, his superior, slipping us instead the Stoics, the Epicureans, and Cicero. Very likely the
most impressive part of Greek thought and its
verbal expression is lost to us, a fate not to be
wondererl at if one remembers the misfortunes
that befell Scotus Erigena and Pascal and the
fact that in even this enlightened century the
first edition of Schopenhauer's Welt als Wille
ttnd VOl'stellung had to be sold for wastepaper.
If someone wishes to assume a special fatal power
governing such events, he may do so and say
with Goethe "Do not complain of the mean and
the pett\', for regardless of what you have been
told, the mean and the petty are everywhere in
control." That they are more in control than the
power of truth is certainly true. Mankind so
rarely produces a good book, one which with
bold freedom sounds the battle·cry of truth, the
song of philosophic heroism. And yet the most
wretched accidents, sudden eclipses of men's
minds, superstitious paroxysms and antipathies,
cramped or lazy writing fingers, down to book
worms and rainfall, all determine whether or not
a book will live on another century or tum intoTragic Age of the Greeks 37
ashes and mould. But let us not lament or, in
any event, remember the consolatory words with
which Hamann put an end to the lamentations
of scholars over lost works. "Did not the artist
who squeezed a lentil through the eye of a needle
find enough lentils in a bushel to practice his
acquired skill? One should like to put this question to all the scholars who make no better use
of the works of the ancients than that man did
of his lentils." In the case before us, we might
add, we do not need an additional word, anecdote, or date other than those transmitted to us.
In fact we do not need all that we do have, in
order to demonstrate our general proposition
that the Greeks justify philosophy.
A period which suffers from a so-called high
general level of liberal education but which is devoid of culture in the sense of a unity of style
which characterizes all its life, will not quite
know what to do with philosophy and wouldn't,
if the Genius of Truth himself were to proclaim
it in the streets and the market places. During
such times philosophy remains the learned monologue of the lonely stroller, the accidental loot
of the individual, the secret skeleton in the
closet, or the harmless chatter between senile
academics and children. No one may venture to
fulfill philosophy's law with his own person, no
one may live philosophically with that simple
loyalty which compelled an ancient, no matter
where he was or what he was doing, to deport
himself as a Stoic if he once had pledged faith to
the Stoa. All modern philosophizing is political,
policed by governments, churches, academies,38 
custom, fashion, and human cowardice, all of
which limit it to a fake learnedness. Our philoso·
phy stops with the sigh "If only •.." and with
the insight "Once upon a time . • ." Philosophy
has no rights, and modern man, if he had any
courage or conscience, should really repudiate it.
He might ban it with words similar to those
which Plato used to ban the tragic poets from
his state, though reply could be made, just as
the tragic poets might have made reply to Plato.
If forced for once to speak out, philosophy might
readily say, "Wretched people! Is it my fault if
I am roaming the country among you like a
cheap fortune-teller? If I must hide and disguise
myself as though I were a fallen woman and you
my judges? Just look at my sister, Artl Like me,
she is in exile among barbarians. We no longer
know what to do to save ourselves. True, here
among you we have lost all our rights, but the
judges who shall restore them to us shall judge
you too. And to you they shall say: Go get yourselves a culture. Only then you will find out what
philosophy can and will do."
Greek philosophy seems to begin with an absurd notion, with the proposition that water is
the primal origin and the womb of all things.Tragic Age of the Greeks 39
Is it really necessary for us to take serious notice
of this proposition? It is, and for three reasons.
First, because it tells something about the primal
origin of all things; second, because it does so
in language devoid of image or fable, and finally,
because contained in it, if only embryonically, is
the thought. "all things are one." The first rea·
son still leaves Thales in the company of the reo
ligious and the superstitious; the second takes
him out of such company and shows him as a
natural scientist, but the third makes him the
first Greek philosopher. Had he said, "water
turns into earth," we should have but a scientific
hypothesis, a wrong one but difficult to disprove.
But he went beyond scientific considerations. By
presenting his unity-concept in the form of his
water.hypothesis, Thales did not, it is true, overcome the low level of empiric insight prevalent
in his time. What he did was to pass over its
horizon. The sparse and un-ordered observations
of an empirical nature which he made regarding
the occurrence and the transformations of water
(more specifically, of moisture) would have al·
lowed, much less made advisable, no such gigantic generalization. What drove him to it was a
metaphysical conviction which had its origin in
a mystic intuition. We meet it in every philosophy, together with the ever-renewed attempts at
a more suitable expression, this proposition that
"all things are one."
It is strange how high·handedly such a faith
deals with all empiricism. In connection with
Thales, particularly, we can learn what philosophy has always done when it would reach its mag-40 Philosophy in tlte
netically attractive goal past all the hedges of
experience. Philosophy leaps ahead on tiny toeholds; hope and intuition lend wings to its feet.
Calculating reason lumbers heavily behind,
looking for better footholds, for reason too wants
to reach that alluring goal which its divine comrade has long since reached. It is like seeing
two mountain climbers standing before a wilel
mountain stream that is tossing boulders along
its course: one of them light-footedly leaps over
it, using the rocks to cross, even though behind
and beneath him they hurtle into the depths.
The other stands helpless; he must first build
himself a fundament which will carry his heavy
cautious steps. Occasionally this is not possible,
and then there exists no god who can help him
across. What then is it that brings philosophical
thinking so quickly to its goal? Is it different
from the thinking that calculates and measures,
only by virtue of the greater rapidity with which
it transcends all space? No, its feet are propelled
by an alien, iJIogical power-the power of creative imagination. 