
Were it my choice to exercise,
I know that I would opt for
a cosy place in Paradise:
Better still - outside the door!
58. The Crooked Nose 10
Your nose projects, so grand and plump,
into the land, its nostrils pump -
thus hornJess rhino, lacking grace
you fall, proud mortal, on your face!
And that's the way it always goes:
Straight pride alongside crooked nose.
59. The Pen Scribbles
My pen, it scribbles: this is heil!
Have I been damned to have to scribble? -
I dip it boldly in the well
and write broad streams of inky drive!.
See how it flows, so full, so pure!
See how each thing I try succeeds!
10 Nashorn means rhinoceros, from Nase (nose) and Horn.
22
The text's not lucid, to be sure -
So what? What I write no one reads.
60. Higher Men
He climbs on high - him we should praise!
But that one comes from high up always!
Immune to praise he lives his days,
he is the sun's rays!
61. The Sceptic Speaks
Your life is halfway spent,
the clock hand moves, your soul now quakes with fear!
Long roaming forth it went
and searched but nothing found - and wavers here?
Your life is halfway spent:
In pain and error how the hours did crawl!
Why can you not relent? -
Just this I seek - some reason for it all!
62. Ecce Homo
Yes! I know now whence I came!
Unsatiated like a flame
my glowing ember squanders me.
Light to all on which I seize,
ashen everything I leave:
Flame am I most certainly!
63. Stellar Morals
Ordained to move as planets do,
what matters, star, the dark to you?
Roll blithely through our human time!
Beyond its wretched mis'ry climb!
The furthest world deserves your shine:
For you compassion is a crime!
One law applies to you: be thine!
I
The teachers ofthe purpose ofexistence. - Whether I regard human beings
with a good or with an evil eye, I always find them engaged in a single
task, each and every one of them: to do what benefits the preservation of
the human race. Not from a feeling of love for the race, but simply
because within them nothing is older, stronger, more inexorable and
invincible than this instinct - because this instinct constitutes the essence
of our species and herd. One might quickly enough, with the usual
myopia from five steps away, divide one's neighbours into useful and
harmful, good and evil; but on a large-scale assessment, upon further
reflection on the whole, one grows suspicious of this tidying and
separating and finally abandons it. Even the most harmful person may
actually be the most useful when it comes to the preservation of the
species; for he nurtures in himself or through his effects on others
drives without which humanity would long since have become feeble or
rotten. Hatred, delight in the misfortunes of others, the lust to rob and
rule, and whatever else is called evil: all belong to the amazing economy
of the preservation of the species, an economy which is certainly costly,
wasteful, and on the whole most foolish - but still proven to have
preserved our race so far. I no longer know whether you, my dear fellow
man and neighbour, are even capable of living in a way which is
damaging to the species, i.e. 'unreasonably' and 'badly'. What might
have harmed the species may have become extinct many thousands of
years ago and may by now belong to the things that are no longer
possible even for God. Pursue your hest or your worst desires, and
above all, perish! In both cases you are probably still in some way a
promoter and benefactor of humanity and are thus entitled to your
eulogists - as well as to your mockers! But you will never find someone
who could completely mock you, the individual, even in your hest
qualities, someone who could bring home to you as far as truth allows
your boundless, fly- and frog-like wretchedness! To laugh at oneself as
one would have to laugh in order to laugh.from the whole truth - for that,
not even the hest have had enough sense of truth, and the most gifted
have had far too little genius! Perhaps even laughter still has a future -
when the proposition 'The species is everything, an individual is always
nothing' has become part of humanity and this ultimate liberation and
irresponsibility is accessible to everyone at all times. Perhaps laughter
27The Cay Science
will then have formed an alliance with wisdom; perhaps only 'gay
science' will remain. At present, things are still quite different; at
present, the comedy of existence has not yet 'become conscious' of
itself; at present, we still live in the age of tragedy, in the age of
moralities and religions. What is the meaning of the ever-new appearance of these founders of moralities and religions, of these instigators of
fights about moral valuations, these teachers of pangs of conscience and
religious wars? What is the meaning of these heroes on this stage? For
these have been the heroes thus far; and everything else, even if at times
it was all that we could see and was far too near, has always served only
to set the stage for these heroes, whether as machinery and backdrop or
in the role of confidant and servant. (The poets, for example, were
always the servants of some kind of morality.) It is obvious that these
tragedies, too, work in the interest of the species, even if they should
believe that they are working in the interest of God, as God's emissaries.
They, too, promote the life of the species by promoting the faith in life.
'Life is worth living', each of them shouts, 'there is something to life,
there is something behind life, beneath it; beware!' This drive, which
rules the highest as well as the basest of human beings - the drive for
the preservation of the species - erupts from time to time as reason and
passion of mind; it is then surrounded by a resplendent retinue of
reasons and tries with all its might to make us forget that fundamentally
it is drive, instinct, stupidity, lack of reasons. Life ought to be loved,
because -! Man ought to advance himself and his neighbour, because -!
What names all these Oughts and Becauses have been given and may yet
be given in the future! The ethical teacher makes his appearance as the
teacher of the purpose of existence in order that what happens necessarily and always, by itself and without a purpose, shall henceforth seem
to be done for a purpose and strike man as reason and an ultimate
commandment; to this end he invents a second, different existence and
takes by means of his new mechanics the old, ordinary existence off its
old, ordinary hinges. To be sure, in no way does he want us to laugh at
existence, or at ourselves - or at him; for him, an individual is always an
individual, something first and last and tremendous; for him there are
no species, sums, or zeroes. Foolish and fanciful as his inventions and
valuations may be, badly as he may misjudge the course of nature and
deny its conditions - and all ethical systems hitherto have been so
foolish and contrary to nature that humanity would have perished from
28
every one had it gained power over humanity- all the same! Every time
'the hero' appeared on stage, something new was attained: the gruesome
counterpart of laughter, that profound shock that many individuals feel
at the thought: 'Yes, living is worth it! Yes, I am worthy of living!' Life
and I and you and all of us became interesting to ourselves once again for
a while. There is no denying that in the long run each of these great
teachers of a purpose was vanquished by laughter, reason and nature:
the brief tragedy always changed and returned into the eternal comedy
of existence, and the 'waves of uncountable laughter' - to cite
Aeschylus 1 - must in the end also come crashing down on the greatest
of these tragedians. Despite all this corrective laughter, human nature
on the whole has surely been altered by the recurring emergence of such
teachers of the purpose of existence - it has acquired one additional need,
the need for the repeated appearance of such teachers and such
teachings of a 'purpose'. Man has gradually become a fantastic animal
that must fulfil one condition of existence more than any other animal:
man must from time to time believe he knows why he exists; his race
cannot thrive without a periodic trust in life - without faith in the reason
in lift! And ever again the human race will from time to time decree:
'There is something one is absolutely forbidden henceforth to laugh at.'
And the most cautious friend of man will add: 'Not only laughter and
gay wisdom but also the tragic, with all its sublime unreason, belongs to
the means and necessities of the preservation of the species.' And
therefore! Therefore! Therefore! Oh, do you understand me, my
brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and flood? We, too,
have our time!
2
lntellectual conscience. - I keep having the same experience and keep
resisting it anew each time; I do not want to believe it although I can
grasp it as with my bands: the great majority lacks an intellectual
conscience - indeed, it has often seemed to me as if someone requiring
such a conscience would be as lonely in the most densely populated
cities as he would be in the desert. Everyone looks at you with strange
1 A mistranslation of lines 89-90 of Prometheus Bound formerly ascribed to the fifth-century (B c)
Athenian dramatist Aeschylus. The lines actually read: 'countless laughter of the sea waves'.
29The Cay Science
eyes and goes on handling their scales, calling this good and that evil;
nobody as much as blushes when you notice that their weights are
underweight - nor do they become indignant with you; perhaps they
laugh at your doubts. I mean: to the great majority it is not contemptible
to believe this or that and to live accordingly without first becoming
aware of the final and most certain reasons pro and con, and without
even troubling themselves about such reasons afterwards: the most
gifted men and the noblest women still belong to this 'great majority'.
But what are goodheartedness, refinement, and genius to me when the
person possessing these virtues tolerates slack feelings in his believing
and judging and when he does not consider the desire for certainty to be
his inmost craving and deepest need - as that which separates the
higher human beings from the lower! I discovered in certain pious
people a hatred of reason and I was well disposed towards them for that:
at least this betrayed their bad intellectual conscience! But to stand in
the midst of this rerum concordia discors2 and the whole marvellous
uncertainty and ambiguity of existence without questioning, without
trembling with the craving and rapture of questioning, without at least
hating the person who questions, perhaps even being faintly amused by
him - that is what I feel to be contemptible, and this is the feeling I look
for first in anyone. Some folly keeps persuading me that every person
has this feeling, simply as human. That is my type of injustice.
3
Noble and common. - For common natures all noble, magnanimous
feelings appear to be inexpedient and therefore initially incredible: they
give a wink when they hear of such things and seem to want to say,
'Surely there must be some advantage involved; one cannot see through
every wall' - they are suspicious of the noble person, as if he were
furtively seeking his advantage. If they become all too clearly convinced
of the absence of selfish intentions and gains, they view the noble person
as a kind of fool: they despise him in his pleasure and laugh at the
sparkle in his eye. 'How could one enjoy being at a disadvantage? How
could one want with open eyes to be disadvantaged? Some disease of
reason must be linked to the noble affection' - thus they think and look
2 'the discordant harmony ofthings'; from Horace, Epistles 1.12.19
30
disparagingly, the way they disparage the pleasure that a madman
derives from his fixed idea. What distinguishes the common nature is
that it unflinchingly keeps sight of its advantage, and that this thought
of purpose and advantage is even stronger than its strongest drives; not
to allow these drives to lead it astray to perform inexpeditious acts -
that is its wisdom and self-esteem. In comparison, the higher nature is
more unreasonable - for the noble, magnanimous, and self-sacrificing
person does in faet succumb to his drives; and in his hest moments, his
reason pauses. An animal that protects its young at the risk of its own life
or during the mating period follows the female unto death does not
think of <langer and death; its reason likewise pauses because the
pleasure in its brood or in the female and the fear of being deprived of
this pleasure dominate it totally; the animal becomes stupider than it
usually is - just like the person who is noble and magnanimous. Such
persons have several feelings of pleasure and displeasure so strong that
they reduce the intellect to silence or to servitude: at that point their
heart displaces their head, and one speaks thenceforth of 'passion'.
(Occasionally we also encounter the opposite, the 'reversal of passion',
as it were; for example, somebody once laid his hand on Fontenelle's
heart and said, 'What you have here, my clear sir, is also brains.'3) The
unreason or odd reason (Unvernunft oder Quervernunft) of passion is
what the common type despises in the noble, especially when this
passion is directed at objects whose value seems quite fantastic and
arbitrary. He is annoyed by the person who succumbs to the passion of
the belly, but at least he comprehends the appeal that plays the tyrant in
this case; but he cannot comprehend how anyone could, for example,
risk health and honour for the sake of a passion for knowledge. The
higher nature's taste is for exceptions, for things that leave most people
cold and seem to lack sweetness; the higher nature has a singular value
standard. Moreover, it usually believes that the idiosyncrasy of its taste
is not a singular value standard; rather, it posits its values and disvalues
as generally valid and so becomes incomprehensible and impractical. It
is very rare that a higher nature has enough reason left over to
understand and treat commonplace people as what they are; above all, it
believes in its own passion as something that is present in everyone but
3 French writer of fables (1657- 1757); his most important work is the Dialogues ofthe Dead (1683)
to which Nietzsche refers in §94.
31The Cay Science
concealed, and in this belief it is full of ardour and eloquence. Now
when such exceptional people do not themselves feel like exceptions,
how can they ever understand the common natures and arrive at a
proper estimate of the rule! - and so they, too, speak of the stupidity,
inexpedience, and fancifulness of humanity, stunned that the world is
taking such an insane course and that it will not commit itself to that
which 'is needful'. - This is the eternal injustice of the noble.
4
What preserves the species. - The strongest and most evil spirits have so
far done the most to advance humanity: time and again they rekindled
the dozing passions - every ordered society puts the passions to sleep - ,
time and again they reawakened the sense of comparison, of contradiction, of delight in what is new, daring, unattempted; they forced men
to pit opinion against opinion, ideal model against ideal model. Mostly
by force of arms, by toppling boundary stones, by violating pieties - but
also by means of new religions and moralities! In every teacher and
preacher of what is new we find the same 'mischief' that makes
conquerors infamous, even if its expression is subtler and does not
instantly set the muscles in motion and for just that reason does not
make one as infamous! What is new, however, is under all circumstances
evil, being that which wants to conquer, to overthrow the old boundary
stones and pieties; and only what is old is good! In every age the good
men are those who bury the old thoughts deeply and make them bear
fruit - the farmers of the spirit. But that land is eventually exhausted,
and the ploughshare of evil must come time and again. Nowadays there
is a thoroughly erroneous moral theory which is celebrated especially in
England: it claims that judgements of 'good' and 'evil' sum up experiences of what is 'expedient' and 'inexpedient'; that what is called good
preserves the species while what is called evil harms it. In truth,
however, the evil drives are just as expedient, species-preserving, and
indispensable as the good ones - they just have a different function.
5
Unconditional duties. - All persons who feel that they need the strongest
words and sounds, the most eloquent gestures and postures, in order to
32
be effective at all - revolutionary politicians, socialists, preachers of
repentance with or without Christianity, all of whom refuse to accept
semi-successes: they all speak of 'duties', and indeed always of duties
with an unconditional character - without such duties they would have
no right to their great pathos; they know that quite well! So they reach
for moral philosophies that preach some categorical imperative, or they
ingest a goodly piece of religion, as Mazzini4 did, for example. Because
they want the unconditional confidence of others, they first need
unconditional confidence in themselves on the basis of some ultimate,
indisputable and inherently sublime commandment, and they want to
feel like and pass themselves off as its servants and instruments. Here
we have the most natura! and usually very influential opponents of
moral enlightenment and scepticism; but they are rare. On the other
hand, a very comprehensive class of these opponents can be found
wherever self-interest teaches submission while reputation and honour
seem to prohibit it. Whoever feels his dignity violated by the thought of
being the instrument of a prince or party or sect or even a financial power
- say, as the descendant of an old, proud family - but still wants to or
must be this instrument befare himself and befare the public, needs
poignant principles that can be mouthed any time, principles of an
unconditional 'ought' to which one may openly submit and be seen to
have submitted without shame. All refined servility clings to the
categorical imperative and is the mortal enemy of those who want to
deprive duty of its unconditional character: that is what decency
demands of them, and not only decency.
6
Lass ofdignity. - Reflection has lost all its dignity of form: we have made
a laughing-stock of the ceremony and solemn gestures of reflection, and
couldn't stand an old-style wise man. We think too fast, while on our
way somewhere, while walking or in the midst of all sorts of business,
even when thinking of the most serious things; we need little preparation, not even much silence: it is as if we carried around in our heads an
unstoppable machine that keeps working even under the most unfavourable circumstances. Formerly, one could tell just by looking at a person
4 Italian liberal (1805-72).
33The Cay Science
that he wanted to think - it was probably a rare occurrence! - , that he
now wanted to become wiser and was preparing himself for a thought:
one would set one's face as for prayer and stop walking; yes, one stood
still for hours on the street once the thought 'arrived' - on one or two
legs. The dignity of the matter required it!
7
Something for the industrious. - Anyone who now wishes to make a study
of moral matters opens up for himself an immense field of work. All
kinds of passions have to be thought through separately, pursued
separately through ages, peoples, great and small individuals; their
entire reason and all their evaluations and modes of illuminating things
must be revealed! So far, all that has given colour to existence still lacks
a history: where could you find a history of love, of avarice, of envy, of
conscience, of piety, of cruelty? Even a comparative history of law or
even of punishment is so far lacking entirely. Has anyone done research
on the different ways of dividing up the day or of the consequences of a
regular schedule of work, festivals, and the rest? Do we know the moral
effects of foods? Is there a philosophy of nutrition? (The incessantly
erupting clamour for and against vegetarianism proves that there is still
no such philosophy!) Has anyone collected people's experiences of
living together - in monasteries, for example? Has anyone depicted the
dialectic of marriage and friendship? The customs of scholars, businessmen, artists, artisans - have they found their thinkers? There is so
much in them to think about! Everything that humans have viewed until
now as the 'conditions of their existence' and all the reason, passion,
and superstition that such a view involves - has this been researched
exhaustively? To observe how differently the human drives have grown
and still could grow depending on the moral climate - that alone
involves too much work for even the most industrious; it would require
whole generations, and generations of scholars who would collaborate
systematically, to exhaust the points of view and the material. The same
applies to the demonstration of the reasons for the variety of moral
climates ('why does the sun of one fundamental moral judgement and
primary value-standard shine here - and another one there?'). Yet
another new project would be to determine the erroneousness of all
these reasons and the whole essence of moral judgements to date. If all
34
these jobs were done, the most delicate question of all would emerge in
the foreground: whether science is able to furnish goals of action after
having proved that it can take such goals away and annihilate them; and
then an experimenting would be in order, in which every kind of
heroism could find satisfaction - an experimenting that might last for
centuries and eclipse all the great projects and sacrifices of history to
date. So far, science has not yet built its cyclops-buildings; 5 but the time
for that will come, too.
8
Unconscious virtues. - All qualities of a person of which he is conscious -
and especially those he supposes to be visible and plain to others also -
are subject to laws of development entirely different from those qualities
which are unknown or badly known to him, which conceal themselves
by means of their subtlety even from the eye of a rather subtle observer
and which know how to hide as if behind nothing at all. This might be
compared to the subtle sculptures on the scales of reptiles: it would be a
mistake to take them for ornaments or weapons, since one sees them
only with a microscope, i.e. with an artificially sharpened eye, which
similar animals for whom they might signify something like ornaments
or weapons simply lack. Our visible moral qualities, and especially those
that we believe to be visible, take their course; and the invisible ones,
which have the same names but are neither ornaments nor weapons
with regard to others, also take their course: probably a totally different
one, with lines and subtleties and sculptures that might amuse a god
with a divine microscope. For example, we have our diligence, our
ambition, our acuteness - all the world knows about them - and in
addition, we probably also have our industry, our ambition, our acuteness; but for these reptile scales, no microscope has yet been invented!
At this point the friends of instinctive morality will say: 'Bravo! At least
he considers unconscious virtues to be possible - and that's enough for
us.' Oh, how little you are satisfied with!
5 The Cyclopes, in ancient mythology, were one-eyed giants. Though represented in Homer as
wild creatures, they elsewhere appear as workmen of superhuman power, and were credited with
building massive ancient fortifications such as those of Tiryns.
35The Cay Science
9
Our eruptions. - Countless things that humanity acquired in earlier
stages, but so feebly and embryonically that no one could tell that they
had been acquired, suddenly emerge into the light much later, perhaps
after centuries; meanwhile they have become strong and ripe. Some
ages seem to lack completely some talent or virtue, just as some people
do: but just wait for their children and grandchildren, if you have time
to wait - they bring to light the inner qualities of their grandfathers, the
qualities that their grandfathers themselves did not know about. Often
it is already the son that betrays his father: the father understands
himself better once he has a son. All of us harbour in ourselves bidden
gardens and plantations; and, to use another metaphor, we are all
growing volcanoes approaching their hour of eruption; how near or
distant that is, of course, nobody knows, not even the good Lord.
IO
A kind ofatavism. - I prefer to understand the rare human beings of an
age as suddenly appearing, late ghosts of past cultures and their powers:
as atavisms of a people and its mores - that way one can really understand
something about them! They now seem strange, rare, extraordinary;
and whoever feels these powers in himself must nurse, defend, honor,
and cultivate them against another world that resists them: and so he
becomes either a great human being or a mad and eccentric one, unless
he perishes too soon. Formerly, these same qualities were common and
therefore considered ordinary: they weren't distinguishing. They were
perhaps demanded, presupposed; it was impossible to become great
through them, if only because there was also no <langer of becoming
mad and lonely through them. It is principally in the generations and
castes that conserve a people that we find such recrudescences of old
instincts, while such atavism is highly improbable where races, habits,
and valuations change too rapidly. For tempo is as significant a power in
the development of peoples as in music: in our case, what is absolutely
necessary is an andante of development, as the tempo of a passionate and
slow spirit - and that is after all what the spirit of conservative
generations is like.
Il
Consciousness (Bewuj1tsein)6 - Consciousness (BewujJtheit) is the latest
development of the organic, and hence also its most unfinished and
unrobust feature. Consciousness gives rise to countless mistakes that
lead an animal or human being to perish sooner than necessary, 'beyond
destiny', as Homer puts it. 7 If the preserving alliance of the instincts
were not so much more powerful, if it did not serve on the whole as a
regulator, humanity would have to perish with open eyes of its misjudging and its fantasizing, of its lack of thoroughness and its incredulity -
in short, of its consciousness; or rather, without the instincts, humanity
would long have ceased to exist! Before a function is fully developed and
mature, it constitutes a <langer to the organism; it is a good thing for it
to be properly tyrannized in the meantime! Thus, consciousness is
properly tyrannized - and not least by one's pride in it! One thinks it
constitutes the kernel of man, what is abiding, eternal, ultimate, most
original in himl One takes consciousness to be a given determinate
magnitude! One denies its growth and intermittences! Sees it as 'the
unity of the organism'! This ridiculous overestimation and misapprehension of consciousness has the very useful consequence that an alltoo-rapid development of consciousness was prevented. Since they
thought they already possessed it, human beings did not take much
trouble to acquire it - and things are no different today! The task of
assimilating knowledge and making it instinctive is still quite new; it is
only beginning to dawn on the human eye and is yet barely discernible -
it is a task seen only by those who have understood that so far we have
incorporated only our errors and that all of our consciousness refers to
errors!
12
On the aim ofscience. - What? The final aim of science should be to give
man as much pleasure and as little displeasure as possible? But what if
6 The usual German word for 'consciousness' is BewufJtsein (literally 'being-in-a-state-of-awareness-of') and this is the term Nietzsche uses in the title of this paragraph. He then however shifts
to the much more unusual word BewujJtheit, which has an ending (heit) that usually signifies an
abstract property, and argues against the view that having such a property is something
fundamental or especially important to humans.
7 See I/iad1u55 and xx.30, 336.
37The Cay Science
pleasure and displeasure are so intertwined that whoever wants as much
as possible of one must also have as much as possible of the other - that
whoever wants to learn to 'jubilate up to the heavens' must also be
prepared for 'grief unto death'?8 And that may well be the way things
are! At least the Stoics believed that this is how things are, and they were
consistent when they also desired as little pleasure as possible in order to
derive as little pain as possible from life (by using the saying 'The
virtuous man is the happiest man',9 they had both a school slogan for the
masses and a fine casuistic delicacy for the refined). Even today you still
have the choice: either as little displeasure as possible, in short, lack of pain
- and socialists and politicians of all parties fundamentally have no right
to promise their people any more than that - or as much displeasure as
possible as the price for the growth of a bounty of refined pleasures and
joys that hitherto have seldom been tasted. Should you decide on the
former, i.e. if you want to decrease and diminish people's susceptibility
to pain, you also have to decrease and diminish their capacity for joy.
With science one can actually promote either of these goals! So far it may
still be better known for its power to deprive man of his joys and make
him colder, more statue-like, more stoic. But it might yet be found to be
the great giver ofpain! - And then its counterforce might at the same time
be found: its immense capacity for letting new galaxies of joy flare up!
13
On the doctrine ofthe feeling ofpower. - Benefiting and hurting others are
ways of exercising one's power over them - that is all one wants in such
cases! We hurt those to whom we need to make our power perceptible,
for pain is a much more sensitive means to that end than pleasure: pain
always asks for the cause, while pleasure is inclined to stop with itself
and not look back. We benefit and show benevolence toward those who
already depend on us in some way (that is, who are used to thinking of
us as their causes); we want to increase their power because we thus
increase our own, or we want to show them the advantage of being in
our power - that way, they will be more satisfied with their situation and
8 Quotation from Aet 111, Scene 2 of Goethe's Egmont, frequently cited in Germany as an
archetypal description of the Romantic personality.
9 This doctrine, originally defended by Socrates (see Xenophon, Memorabilia 111.5), was a central
part of Stoic ethics (see A. A. Long and D. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers [Cambridge
University Press, 1987], esp. vol. 1, pp. 344-436, and esp. pp. 357-9).
more hostile towards and willing to fight against the enemies of our
power. Whether in benefiting or hurting others we make sacrifices does
not affect the ultimate value of our actions; even if we stake our lives, as
martyrs do for their church, it is a sacrifice made for our desire for
power or for the preservation of our feeling of power. He who feels 'I
am in possession of the truth' - how many possessions does he not
renounce in order to save this feeling! What would he not throw
overboard in order to stay 'on top' - that is, above the others who lack
'the truth'! The state in which we hurt others is certainly seldom as
agreeable, in an unadulterated way, as that in which we benefit others; it
is a sign that we are still lacking power, or it betrays a frustration in the
face of this poverty; it brings new dangers and uncertainties to the
power we do possess and clouds our horizon with the prospect of
revenge, scorn, punishment, failure. Only to the most irritable and
covetous adherents of the feeling of power - to those for whom the sight
of those who are already subjected (the objects of benevolence) is a
burden and boredorn - might it be more pleasurable to imprint the seal
of power on the reluctant. It depends on how one is accustomed to spice
one's life; it is a matter of taste whether one prefers the slow or the
sudden, the safe or the dangerous and daring increase in power - one
always seeks this or that spice according to one's temperament. An easy
prey is something contemptible for proud natures; they take delight
only at the sight of unbroken persons who could become their enemies
and at the sight of all possessions that are hard to come by; they are
often hard towards someone who is suffering, for he is not worthy of
their contention and pride - but they are the more obliging toward their
equals, against whom it would be honourable to fight and struggle ifthe
occasion should arise. Spurred by the good feeling of this perspective,
the members of the knightly caste became accustomed to treating each
others with exquisite courtesy. Compassion is the most agreeable feeling
for those who have little pride and no prospect of great conquests; for
them, easy prey - and that is what those who suffer are - is something
enchanting. Compassion is praised as the virtue of prostitutes.
14
The things people ca!! love. - Greed and love: such different feelings
these terms evoke! And yet it could be the same instinct, named twice:
39The Cay Science
once disparaged by those who already have, in whom the instinct has
somewhat calmed down and who now fear for what they 'have'; the
other time seen from the standpoint of the unsatisfied, the thirsty, and
therefore glorified as 'good'. Our love of our neighbours - is it not a
craving for new property? And likewise our love of knowledge, of truth,
and altogether any craving for what is new? We slowly grow tired of the
old, of what we safely possess, and we stretch out our bands again; even
the most beautiful landscape is no longer sure of our love after we have
lived in it for three months, and some more distant coast excites our
greed: possession usually diminishes the possession. The pleasure we
take in ourselves tries to preserve itself by time and again changing
something new into ourselves - that is simply what possession means. To
grow tired of a possession is to grow tired of ourselves. (One can also
suffer from an excess - even the desire to throw away, to dole out, can
take on the honorary name 'love'.) When we see someone suffering, we
like to use this opportunity to take possession of him; that is for example
what those who become his benefactors and those who have compassion
for him do, and they call the lust for new possessions that is awakened in
them 'love'; and their delight is like that aroused by the prospect of a
new conquest. Sexual love, however, is what most clearly reveals itself as
a craving for new property: the lover wants unconditional and sole
possession of the longed-for person; he wants a power over her soul as
unconditional as his power over her body; he wants to be the only
beloved, to live and to rule in the other soul as that which is supreme
and most desirable. If one considers that this means excluding the whole
world from a precious good, from joy and enjoyment; if one considers
that the lover aims at the impoverishment and deprivation of all the
competitors and would like to become the dragon guarding his golden
board as the most inconsiderate and selfish of all 'conquerors' and
exploiters; if one considers, finally, that to the lover himself the rest of
the world appears indifferent, pale, and worthless and that he is
prepared to make any sacrifice, upset any arder, subordinate any other
interest; then one is indeed amazed that this wild greed and injustice of
sexual love has been as glorified and deified as it has in all ages - yes,
that this love has furnished the concept of love as the opposite of egoism
when it may in faet be the most candid expression of egoism. 