Friedrich Nietzsche - Twilight of the Idols
PREFACE
Maintaining cheerfulness in the midst of a gloomy task, fraught with
immeasurable responsibility, is no small feat; and yet what is needed more than
cheerfulness? Nothing succeeds if prankishness has no part in it. Excess strength
alone is the proof of strength.
A revaluation of all values: this question mark, so black, so huge that it
casts a shadow over the man who puts it down — such a destiny of a task compels
one to run into the sunlight at every opportunity to shake off a heavy, all-too-heavy
seriousness. Every means is proper to do this; every "case" is a case of luck.
Especially, war. War has always been the great wisdom of all spirits who have
become too introspective, too profound; even in a wound there is the power to heal. A
maxim, the origin of which I withhold from scholarly curiosity, has long been my
motto:
Increscunt animi, virescit volnere virtus.
["The spirits increase, vigor grows through a wound."]
Another mode of convalescence (in certain situations even more to my
liking) is sounding out idols. There are more idols than realities in the world: that is
my "evil eye" upon this world; that is also my "evil ear." Finally to pose questions
with a hammer, and sometimes to hear as a reply that famous hollow sound that can
only come from bloated entrails — what a delight for one who has ears even behind
his ears, for me, an old psychologist and pied piper before whom just that which
would remain silent must finally speak out.
This essay — the title betrays it — is above all a recreation, a spot of
sunshine, a leap sideways into the idleness of a psychologist. Perhaps a new war, too?
And are new idols sounded out? This little essay is a great declaration of war; and
regarding the sounding out of idols, this time they are not just idols of the age, but
eternal idols, which are here touched with a hammer as with a tuning fork: there are
no idols that are older, more assured, more puffed-up — and none more hollow. That
does not prevent them from being those in which people have the most faith; nor does
one ever say "idol," especially not in the most distinguished instance.
Turin, September 30, 1888, on the day when the first book of the
Revaluation of All Values was completed.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
MAXIMS AND ARROWS
1 Idleness is the beginning of all psychology. What? Is psychology a vice?
2 Even the most courageous among us only rarely has the courage to face
what he already knows.
3 To live alone one must be a beast or a god, says Aristotle. Leaving out
the third case: one must be both — a philosopher.4 "All truth is simple." Is that not a double lie?
5 I want, once and for all, not to know many things. Wisdom requires
moderation in knowledge as in other things.
6 In our own wild nature we find the best recreation from our un-nature,
from our spirituality.
7 What? Is man merely a mistake of God's? Or God merely a mistake of
man's?
8 Out of life's school of war: What does not destroy me, makes me
stronger.
9 Help yourself, then everyone will help you. Principle of brotherly love.
10 Not to perpetrate cowardice against one's own acts! Not to leave them in
the lurch afterward! The bite of conscience is indecent.
11 Can an ass be tragic? To perish under a burden one can neither bear nor
throw off? The case of the philosopher.
12 If we have our own why in life, we shall get along with almost any how.
Man does not strive for pleasure; only the Englishman does.
13 Man has created woman — out of what? Out of a rib of his god — of his
"ideal."
14 What? You search? You would multiply yourself by ten, by a hundred?
You seek followers? Seek zeros!
15 Posthumous men — I, for example — are understood worse than timely
ones, but heard better. More precisely: we are never understood — hence our
authority.
16 Among women: "Truth? Oh, you don't know truth! Is it not an attempt
to kill our modesty?"
17 That is the kind of artist I love, modest in his needs: he really wants only
two things, his bread and his art — panem et Circen ["bread and Circe"].
18 Whoever does not know how to lay his will into things, at least lays
some meaning into them: that means, he has the faith that they already obey a will.
(Principle of "faith".)
19 What? You chose virtue and took pride in your virtue, and yet you leer
enviously at the advantages of those without scruples? But virtue involves renouncing
"advantages." (Inscription for an anti-Semite's door.)20 The perfect woman indulges in literature just as she indulges in a small
sin: as an experiment, in passing, looking around to see if anybody notices it — and to
make sure that somebody does.
21 To venture into many situations where one cannot get by with sham
virtues, but where, like the tightrope walker on his rope, one either stands or falls —
or gets away.
22 "Evil men have no songs." How is it, then, that the Russians have songs?
23 "German spirit": for the past eighteen years a contradiction in terms.
24 By searching out origins, one becomes a crab. The historian looks
backward; eventually he also believes backward.
25 Being pleased with oneself protects even against the cold. Has a woman
who knew herself to be well dressed ever caught a cold? I am assuming that she was
barely dressed.
26 I mistrust all systematizers and avoid them. The will to a system is a
lack of integrity.
27 Women are considered profound. Why? Because we never fathom their
depths. But women aren't even shallow.
28 If a woman has only manly virtues, we run away; and if she has no
manly virtues, she runs away herself.
29 "How much has conscience had to chew on in the past! And what
excellent teeth it had! And today — what is lacking?" A dentist's question.
30 One rarely falls into a single error. Falling into the first one, one always
does too much. So one usually perpetrates another one — and now one does too little.
31 When stepped on, a worm doubles up. That is clever. In that way he
lessens the probability of being stepped on again. In the language of morality:
humility.
32 We hate lies and hypocrisy because our sense of honor is easily
provoked. But the same hatred can arise from cowardice, since lies are forbidden by
divine commandment: in that case, we are too cowardly to lie.
33 How little is required for pleasure! The sound of a bagpipe. Without
music, life would be an error. The German imagines that even God sings songs.
34 On ne peut penser et ecrire qu'assis [One cannot think and write except
when seated] (G. Flaubert). There I have caught you, nihilist! The sedentary life is the
very sin against the Holy Spirit. Only thoughts reached by walking have value.35 There are cases in which we are like horses, we psychologists, and
become skittish: we see our own shadow looming up before us. A psychologist must
turn his eyes from himself to see anything at all.
36 Are we immoralists harming virtue? No more than anarchists harm
princes. Only because the latter are shot at do they once more sit securely on their
thrones. Moral: morality must be shot at.
37 You run ahead? Are you doing it as a shepherd? Or as an exception? A
third case would be as a fugitive. First question of conscience.
38 Are you genuine? Or merely an actor? A representative? Or that which
is represented? In the end, perhaps you are merely a copy of an actor. Second question
of conscience.
40 Are you one who looks on? Or one who lends a hand? Or one who looks
away and walks off? Third question of conscience.
41 Do you want to walk along? Or walk ahead? Or walk by yourself? One
must know what one wants and that one wants. Fourth question of conscience.
39 The disappointed one speaks. I searched for great human beings; I
always found only the imitators of their ideals.
42 Those were steps for me, and I have climbed up over them: to that end I
had to pass over them. Yet they thought that I wanted to retire on them.
43 What does it matter if I am right? I am much too right. And he who
laughs best today will also laugh last.
44 The formula of my happiness: a Yes, a No, a straight line, a goal.
THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES
1 About life, the wisest men of all ages have come to the same conclusion:
it is no good. Always and everywhere one has heard the same sound from their
mouths — a sound full of doubt, full of melancholy, full of weariness of life, full of
resistance to life. Even Socrates said, as he died: "To live — that means to be sick a
long time: I owe Asclepius the Savior a rooster." Even Socrates was tired of life.
What does that prove? What does it demonstrate? At one time, one would have said
(and it has been said loud enough by our pessimists): "At least something must be true
here! The consensus of the sages must show us the truth." Shall we still talk like that
today? May we? "At least something must be sick here," we retort. These wisest men
of all ages — they should first be scrutinized closely. Were they all perhaps shaky on
their legs? tottery? decadent? late? Could it be that wisdom appears on earth as a
raven, attracted by a little whiff of carrion?2 The irreverent idea that the great sages are types of decline first occurred
to me precisely in a case where it is most strongly opposed by both scholarly and
unscholarly prejudice: I realized that Socrates and Plato were symptoms of
degeneration, tools of the Greek dissolution, pseudo-Greek, anti-Greek (Birth of
Tragedy, 1872). The consensus of the sages — I recognized this ever more clearly —
proves least of all that they were right in what they agreed on: it shows rather that
they themselves, these wisest men, shared some physiological attribute, and because
of this adopted the same negative attitude to life — had to adopt it. Judgments,
judgments of value about life, for it or against it, can in the end never be true: they
have value only as symptoms, they are worthy of consideration only as symptoms; in
themselves such judgments are meaningless. One must stretch out one's hands and
attempt to grasp this amazing subtlety, that the value of life cannot be estimated. Not
by the living, for they are an interested party, even a bone of contention, and not
impartial judges; not by the dead, for a different reason. For a philosopher to object to
putting a value on life is an objection others make against him, a question mark
concerning his wisdom, an un-wisdom. Indeed? All these great wise men — they
were not only decadents but not wise at all. But let us return to the problem of
Socrates.
3 By birth, Socrates belonged to the lowest class: Socrates was plebeian.
We are told, and can see in sculptures of him, how ugly he was. But ugliness, in itself
an objection, is among the Greeks almost a refutation. Was Socrates a Greek at all?
Ugliness is often enough the expression of a development that has been crossed,
thwarted in some way. Or it appears as declining development. The anthropological
criminologists tell us that the typical criminal is ugly: monstrum in fronte, monstrum
in animo [monstrous in appearance, monstrous in spirit]. But the criminal is a
decadent. Was Socrates a typical criminal? At least that would be consistent with the
famous judgment of the physiognomist that so offended the friends of Socrates. This
foreigner told Socrates to his face that he was a monstrum — that he harbored in
himself all the worst vices and appetites. And Socrates merely answered: "You know
me, sir!"
4 Socrates' decadence is suggested not only by the admitted wantonness
and anarchy of his instincts, but also by the overdevelopment of his logical ability and
his characteristic thwarted sarcasm. Nor should we forget those auditory
hallucinations which, as "the daimonion of Socrates," have been given a religious
interpretion. Everything about Socrates is exaggerated, buffo, a caricature; everything
is at the same time concealed, ulterior, underground. I want to understand what
idiosyncrasy begot that Socratic idea that reason and virtue equal happiness — that
most bizarre of all equations which is, moreover, opposed to every instinct of the
earlier Greeks.
5 With Socrates, Greek taste changes in favor of logical argument. What
really happened there? Above all, a noble taste is vanquished; with dialectics the plebs
come to the top. Before Socrates, argumentative conversation was repudiated in good
society: it was considered bad manners, compromising. The young were warned
against it. Furthermore, any presentation of one's motives was distrusted. Honest
things, like honest men, do not have to explain themselves so openly. What must first
be proved is worth little. Wherever authority still forms part of good bearing, where
one does not give reasons but commands, the logician is a kind of buffoon: one laughsat him, one does not take him seriously. Socrates was the buffoon who got himself
taken seriously: what really happened there?
6 One chooses logical argument only when one has no other means. One
knows that one arouses mistrust with it, that it is not very persuasive. Nothing is
easier to nullify than a logical argument: the tedium of long speeches proves this. It is
a kind of self-defense for those who no longer have other weapons. Unless one has to
insist on what is already one's right, there is no use for it. The Jews were
argumentative for that reason; Reynard the Fox also — and Socrates too?
7 Is the irony of Socrates an expression of revolt? Of plebeian
ressentiment? Does he, as one oppressed, enjoy his own ferocity in the knife thrusts of
his argument? Does he avenge himself on the noble audience he fascinates? As a
dialectician, he holds a merciless tool in his hand; he can become a tyrant by means of
it; he compromises those he conquers. The dialectician leaves it to his opponent to
prove that he is not an idiot: he enrages and neutralizes his opponent at the same time.
The dialectician renders the intellect of his opponent powerless. Indeed, in Socrates, is
dialectic only a form of revenge?
8 I have explained how it was that Socrates could repel: it is therefore all
the more necessary to explain how he could fascinate. That he discovered a new kind
of contest, that he became its first fencing master for the noble circles of Athens, is
one point. He fascinated by appealing to the competitive impulse of the Greeks — he
introduced a variation into the wrestling match between young men and youths.
Socrates was a great erotic.
9 But Socrates guessed even more. He saw through the noble Athenians;
he saw that his own case, his idiosyncrasy, was no longer exceptional. The same kind
of degeneration was quietly developing everywhere: old Athens was coming to an
end. And Socrates understood that the world needed him — his method, his cure, his
personal artifice of self-preservation. Everywhere the instincts were in anarchy,
everywhere one was within sight of excess: monstrum in animo was the common
danger. "The impulses want to play the tyrant; one must invent a counter-tyrant who
is stronger." After the physiognomist had revealed to Socrates who he was — a cave
of bad appetites — the great master of irony let slip another clue to his character.
"This is true," he said, "but I mastered them all." How did Socrates become master
over himself? His case was, at bottom, merely the extreme case, only the most
striking instance of what was then beginning to be a epidemic: no one was any longer
master over himself, the instincts turned against themselves. He fascinated, being an
extreme case; his awe inspiring ugliness proclaimed him as such to all who could see:
he fascinated, of course, even more as an answer, a solution, an apparent cure for this
disease.
