
wherever he goes he is a once
embraced by a bond of tacit conventions in regard to many things,
especially in the realms of religion and art: this impressive
homogeneity, this tutti uniono* which no one commands but which
is aways ready to break forth, seduces him to the beliefthat a cultre
here holds sway. But systematic and oppressive philistinism does
not constitute a culture, even an inferior culture, merely because it
possesses system: it must aways be the antithesis of a culture,
namely a permanendy estahlished barbarity. For that uniformity
which is so striking in the cltivated pe0ple of Germany today is a
unity only through the conscious or unconscious exclusion and
negation of every artisticaly productive form and the demand of a
tre style. An unhappy contortion must have taen place in the bran
of the cultral philistine: he regards as culture precisely that which
negates culture, and since he is accustomed to proceed with consistency he fnally acquires a coherent collection of such negations, a
system of un-culture, to which one might even concede a certain
'unity ofstyle' if it made any sense to speak ofa barbarism with style.
Ifhe is allowed to choose between a stlistically agreeable action and
one of the opposite kind, he invariably elects the latter, and because
he always does so al his actions bear the sae negative stamp. It is
precisely this negtive stamp which enables him to recognize the
nature of the 'German culture' he has patented: whatever does not
correspond to it he adjudges hostile and inimical to him. In this case
the cultura philistine does no more than defend himself: he denies,
secetes, stops his ears, averts his eyes, he is a negative being even in
his hatred and hostility. The person he hates most ofall, however, is
him who teats him as a philistine and tells him what he is: a hindrance to the strong and creative, a labyrinth for ali who doubt and
go astray, a swamp to the feet of the weay, a fetter t all who would
pursue lof goas, a poisonous mist to new buds, a parching deser
"tutti uniono: everybody, together
8David Struss, the confessor and the writer
to the German spirit seeking and thirsting for new life. For it seeks,
this German spirit! and you hate it because it seeks and refuses to
believe you when you say you have already found what it is seeking.
How is it possible that a type such as the cultural philistine could
have come into existence and, once extant, could a(quire · the
authority of supreme arbiter over all the problems of German cultre; how is this possible, after there has fled past us a whole line of
great heroic fgures whose every movement, every feature, whose
questioning voice, whose burning eye, betrayed but one thing: that
the were seekers, and that what they were seeking with such perseverence was precisely that which the cultural philistine fancied he
already possessed: a genuine, original German culture. Is there a
ground, they seemed to ask, so pure, so untouched, of such virginal
holiness, that the German spirit may raise its house upon this
ground and upon no other? Questioning thus, they made their way
through the wilderness and thorns of wretched and meagre ages,
and as seekers they passed fom our sight: so that one of them,
speaking for all, could say in his old age; 'I have toiled for halfa century and allowed myself no rest, but have continually striven and
sought and worked as well and as hard as I could.'*
Butwhat view does our philistine culture take ofthese seekers? It
assumes them to be fnders, not seekers, and seems to forget that it
was as seekers that they regarded themselves. 'We have our culture,
do we not?' they say, 'for we have our classics, do we not? Not only
have the foundations been laid, but the building itself stands already
upon them -we ourselves are this building.' And the philistine raises
his hand to his own brow.
Thus to misjudge our classics, however, and in thinking to honour
them thus to damn them, it is necessary not to know them: and this is
indeed the universal fact. For ctherise itwould be known that there
is only one way of honouring them, and that is to go on seeking in
their spirit and with their courage, and not to grow wea of doing
so. On the other hand, to afx to them the suspect word 'classic' and
fom time to time to 'edif' oneselfwith their works is to resign oneself to those feeble and egoistic sensations promised by our concert
halls and theatres to anyone who can pay for them; the same applies
to the erection of statues of them and the naming of festivals and
societies aer them - all these things are merely cash payments by
means ofwhich the cultural philistine settles accounts with them so
"Goethe to Eckennann, 14 March 1 830.
9Untimely Meditation
as not to have to follow aer them and to go on seeking. For 'All seeking is at an end' is the motto of the philistines.
There was a time when this motto was to some extent sensible: the
time when, during the frst decade of the present century, so much
confsed seekng, experimenting, wrecking, promising, surmising,
hoping was going on in Germany that the spiritual middle class was
right to fear for its own safety. At that time it was right to reject with a
shrug of the shoulders the brew of fantastic ad language-twisting
philosophies and tendentious historiographies, a carival of all te
gods and myths, which the Romantics had mixed together, and t
reject too the current poetic fashions and follies dreamed up in a
state of intoxication - right, that is, because the philistine does not
have the right even to a debauch. With the crafiness pertaining to
baser natures, however, he took the opportunity thus aforded to
cast suspicion on seeking as such and to promote a comfortable consciousness ofhaving aready found. H is eyes were opened to thejoys
of philistinism: he saved himself fom all the wild experimentation
going on by a ?ight into the idyllic, and to te resdessly creative drive
of the artist he opposed a certain easy complacency, a selfcontentent in one's own limitations, one's own placidit, even in
one's own narrow-mindedness. H is attenuated fnger pointed,
without any fase modesty, to the hidden and secret corners of his
life, to the many moving and naive pleasures which sprang up like
blushing flowers in the most wretched depths of the uncultivated
existence and as it were mire of the philistine world.
There were a number of representational talents who, with a
gende brush, depicted the happiness, the cosiness, the prosaicness,
the bucolic health, the ease and contentment to be found in the nursery, the scholar's study and the famhouse. Wit such picturebooks of reality in their hands, these self-satisfed people then
sought to come to terms once and for al with the classics they found
so unsetding and with the demand for frther seeking which proceeded fom them; they devised the concept ofthe epigone-age with
the object of obtaining peace and quiet and so as to meet every
uncomfortable innovation with the condemnatory verdict ' epigonework' . It was these same self-contented people who, with the same
end in view of guaanteeing their own peace, took charge of history
and sought to tansform every science which might be expected to
disturb their complacency into an historical discipline, especially so
in the case ofphilosophy and classical philology. Through historical
awareness they saved themselves from enthusiasm for history was
1 0David Strauss, the conssor and the writer
no longer supposed to engender enthusiasm, even though Goethe
might think it did: stupefaction is now the goa of these unphilosophical admirers of nil admirari* when they seek to understand
everything historically. While professing to hate fanaticism and
intolerance in any form, what they really hated was the donlinating
genius and the trany of the rea demands of culture; and that is
why they employed all their powers in paralyzing, stupefing or disrupting all those quarters where fresh and powerfl movements
might be expected to appear. A philosophy which chastely concealed behind arabesque ?ourishes the philistine confession of its
author invented in addition a formula for the apotheosis of the commonplace: it spoke ofthe rationality of the real, and thus ingratiated
itselfwith the cultural philistine, who aso loves arabesque ?ourishes
but above all conceives himselfalone to be real and treats his reality
as the standard of reason in the world. He now permitted everyone,
himself included, to re?ect, to research, to aestheticize, above all to
compose poetry and music, to paint pictures, even to create entire
philosophies: the sole proviso was that everthing must remain as it
was before, that nothing should at any price undermine the
'rational' and the 'r?al', that is to say, the philistine. The latter, to be
sure, is very patia to abandoning himself from time to time to the
pleasant and daring extravagances of art and sceptical historiography and knows how to appreciate the charm of such forms
of entertainment and distraction; but he sternly segregates the
'serious things of life' - that is to say profession, business, wife and
child - from its pleasures: ad to the latter belongs more or less
everything that has anything to do with culture. Therefore woe to an
art that starts to take itself seriously and makes demands that touch
upon his livelihood, his business and his habits, in short, his philistine 'serious things of life' he averts his ees from such an art as
though fom something indecent, ad with the air of a duenna he
warns every defenceless virtue not to look.
Being so fond of dissuading, he is gratefl to the artist who pays
heed to him and lets himself be dissuaded; he gves him to understand that henceforth no sublime masterpieces are to be demanded
of him, but only two much easier things: either imitation ofactuality
to the point of mimicry in idylls or gently humorous satires, or fee
copies ofthe most familiar ad famous of the classics, though incorporating timid concessions to the taste of the time. For when he
"nil admirar: to wonder at nothing
1 1
values only the imitations of an epigone or the icon-like portrature
of the present, he knows that the latter will glorif him and augment
general contentment with 'actualit', while the former, as well as
being quite hamless, will even enhance his reputation as ajudge of
classical taste - for he has, as aforesaid, come to terms once and for
all with the classics themselves. Finally, he invents for his habits,
modes of thinkng, likes and dislikes, the general formula 'healthiness', and dismisses every uncomfortable disturber of the peace as
being sick and neurotic. Thus David Strauss, a true satisait with the
state of our culture and a typical philistine, once spoke characteristically of 'Arthur Schopenhauer's ingenious but in many ways
unhealthy and unprofitable philosophizing'. For it is a cruel fact that
'the spirit' is accustomed most often to descend upon the 'unhealthy
and unprofitable', and on those occasions when he is honest with
himself even the philistine is aware that the philosophies his kind
produce and bring to maket are in many ways spiritless, though
they are of course extremely healthy and proftable.
For now and then the philistines, whel they are alone by themselves, takewine together and recall, in honest, naive and loquacious
fashion, the great deeds of the war; on tese occasions many things
come t light that are otherise anxiously concealed, and sometimes one ofthem even lets out the fndament secrets of the entire
brotherhood. Such a thing occurred very recently in the case of a
celebrated aesthetician of the Hegelian school of reasoning. The
provocation was, to be sure, sufciently unusual: a circle of philistines was celebrating the memory of a true and genuine nonphilistine, and one moreover who in the strictest sense of the word
perished by the philistines: the memory of the glorious HOlderlin;
and the well-known aesthetician thus had a right on this occasion to
spea oftragic souls which perish through contactwith 'realit' - the
word reality here understood in the sense, already alluded to, of
philistine rationality. But 'reait' is now something di?erent from
what it was in Holderlin's day, and it may well be asked whether he
would have been able to fnd his way in the present great age. 'I do
not know', said Friedrich Vischer, 'whether his gentle soul could
have endured all the harshness involved in any war or all the rottenness we have seen advancing since the war in every sphere of life.
Perhaps he would agan have sunk back into despair. He was one of
the unared souls, he was the Werther of Greece, a lover without
hope; his was a life fll of gentleness and desire, but there was also
strength and substance in his will, and greatness, richness and life in
1 2
his style, which now and then reminds us of Aeschylus. Only his
spirit had too little of hardness in it; he lacked the weapon of
humour; he coul not admit that one can be aphilistine without being a barbarian.' It is this last confession, and not the sugary condolences of
the after-dinner speaker, that concerns us. Yes, one admits to being a
philistine - but a barbarian! Not at any price. Poor H6lderlin was,
alas, incapable of drawing such fne distinctions. If, to be sure, one
understands by the word barbarian the opposite of civilization, or
even equates it with such things as piracy and cannibalism, then the
distinction is justifed; but what the aesthetician is plainly trying to
say is that one can be a philistine and at the same time a man of culture - this is thejoke that poor H6lderlin had not the humour to see
and the lack of which destroyed him.
On this occasion a second admission escaped the speaker: 'It is
not always strength of will, but weakn?ss, which enables us to transcend that longing for the beautiful experienced so profoundly 'by
tragic souls' - that, or something like it, was the confession, deposed
in the nae of the assembled 'we', that is t say the 'transcenders',
the 'transcenders through weakness'! Let us be content with these
admissions! For we now know two things, and from the mouth ofan
initiate: frst, that this 'we' has really got free of the desire for beauty,
has indeed actually transcended it; and, secondly, that this was
accomplished through weakness! In less indiscrete moments this
weakness had been called by a fairer name: it was the celebrated
'healthiness' of the cultural philistines. After this latest information,
however, it might be advisable henceforth to refer to them, not as the
'healthy', but as the weaklings or, more strongly, as the weak. Ifonly
these weakwere not in possession ofthe power! What can it matter to
them what they are called! For they are the masters, and he is no
genuine master who cannot endure a mocking nickname. Indeed,
provided one possesses the power, one is even free to mock at oneself It does not really matter then whether one exposes oneself to
attack: for what does the purple, the mantle of triumph, not protect!
The strength of the cultural philistine comes to light when he admits
his weakness: and the more often and more cynicaly he admits it,
the more clearly he betrays his feelings of self-importance and
superiority. This is the age ofcynical philistine confessions. As Friedrich
Vischer made aural confession, so David Strauss has confessed with
a book: that aural confession was cynical, and so is this book of
confessions.
1 3Untimel Meditations
3
David Strauss makes a tofold confession regarding philistine culture: confession by word and confession by deed - the word othe confssor and the deed ofthe writer. His book entitled The Old Faith and the
Ne is, with regard to its content and with regard to its qualit as a
book and the production of a writer, an uninterrupted confession;
and that he should permit himself to make public confession as to
his beliefs at all already constitutes a confession. * - It may be that
everyone over fort has the right to compile an autobiography, for
even the humblest of us may have experienced and seen from closer
quarters things which the thinker may fnd worth noticing. But to
depose a confession of one's beliefs must be considered incomparably more presumptuous, since it presupposes that the writer
accords value, not merely to what he has experienced or discovered
or seen during his life, but even to what he has believed. Now, the
last thing the real thinker will wish to know is what kind of beliefs are
agreeable to such natures as Strauss or what it i they ' have half
dreamily cobbled together' (p. 1 0) in regard to things of which only
he who knows them at frst hand has a right to speak. Who could
need the confessions of belief of a Ranke or a Mommsen, even
though they are scholars and historians of an order quite different
fom David Strauss? As soon as they sought to interest us in their
beliefs rather than in their knowledge they would be overstepping
their bounds in a ver annoying fashion. But this is what Strauss
does when he tells us of his beliefs. No one wishes to know anything
about them, except perhaps certain narrow-minded opponents of
the Straussian dogas who feel that there must lie behind them a
system of truly diabolical principles and would no doubt want
Strauss to compromise his learned utterances by betraying this
diabolical background. Perhaps these uncouth fellows have even
benefted from Strauss's latest book; the rest of us, however, who
have had no reason to suspect the existence of such a diabolical
background, have done no such thing - we would, indeed, have
been grateful ifwehad found a little diabolism in these pages. For the
voice of Strauss speaking of his new faith is certainly not the voice of
an evil spirit: it is not the voice of a spirit at all, let alone that of an
actual genius. It is the voice of those people whom Strauss
introduces to us as his 'we' - they are, he says, 'scholars and artists,
*Strauss'sDe alte und neue Glaube wa published in 18 72. Nietzsche's page references
are to the original edition. An English translation by Mathilde Blind appeared in
1 8 73.
1 4David Strauss, the confssor and the writer
ofce workers and soldiers, tradesman and landed proprietors, in
their thousands and by no means the worst in the land' - and who,
when they tell us of their beliefs, bore us even more than when they
tell us of their dreams. When they choose to break their silence and
noise their confessions, the volume of their unisono must not be
allowed to deceive us as to the poverty and vulgarity of the tune they
sing. How can the knowledge that a beliefis shared by many make us
more favourably disposed towards it when we also know that if any
one of the many ventured to tell us of it we should not let him finish
but interrupt him with a yawn? If you have such a belief, we should
have t tell him, for God's sake keep quiet about it. It may be that in
earlier years a few simple people sought a thinker in David Strauss:
now they have discovered him to be a believer and are disappointed.
If he had stayed silent* he would have remained a philosopher, at
least so far as these people are concerned: now he is a philosopher to
no one. But he no longer desires the honour of being a thinker; he
wants only to be a new believer, ad is proud ofhis 'ne faith'. Confessing it in writing, he thinks he is inscribing the catechism 'ofmodern ideas' and constructing the broad 'universa highway of the
fture' . In fact, our philistine no longer hesitates to say anything, but
has grown self-assured to the point of cynicism. There was a time- a
very distant time, to be sure - when the philistine was tolerated as
something that said nothing and of which nothing was said: there
was another time when one flattered his oddities, found him amusing and talked about him. This attention gradually turned him into a
coxcomb and he began to take an inordinate pride in his oddities
and ingenuous queer-headedness: now he himselftalks, often in the
manner of Riehl's music for the home. 'But what is this I see! Is it
phantom or reality? How long and broad my poodle grows!'t For
now he is already trundlinglike a hippopotamus alongthe 'universal
highway of the future' and his growling and barking has changed
into the proud accents of the founder of a religion. Are you perhaps
thinking, Master, offounding the religion of the fture? 'It seems to
me that the time has not yet come. It does not even occur to me to
want to destroy any existing church' (p. 8). - Butwhy not, Master? All
that matters is that one is able to. Besides, to speak fankly, you yourself believe you are able to: you have only to look at the last page of
your book. There you say that your new highway 'is the sole uni-
''if he had stayed silent': Nietzsche's German version of the Latin 'si tacuisses,
philosophus mansisses'
tFrom Goethe's Faust, Part I Scene 3.
1 5
versal highway of the future, which needs only to be gradually completed and above all more travelled along for it to become pleasant
and comfortable'. Therefore deny it no longer: the founder of a
religion has been unmasked, the new, pleasant and comfortable
road to the Straussian paradise has been constructed. All you are not
yet content with, you modest man, is the carriage in which you wish
to drive us; you tell us in your closing words: 'that the carriage to
which my valued readers have had to entrust themselves with me
meets every requirement I would not venture to assert' (p. 367): 'we
have been much bu?eted about'. Ah hal you are fshing for compliments, you coquettish religion-founder! We, however, would prefer
to tell you the truth. If your reader prescribes himself the 368 pages
of your religious catechism at the rate of one page every day of the
year if, that is to say, he takes it in the ?mallest possible doses - we
believe that at the end of it he will feel unwell: out ofvexation that it
has failed to produce any e?ect. Gulped down in mouthfuls,
however, as much as possible at once according to the prescription
for all timely books, the draught can do I harm: far from feeling
vexed and unwell, the drinker will be in a merry and happy mood,
just a though nothing has happened, no religion had been destroyed, no universal highway constructed, no confession made -
and that is what I call a effect! Physician and medicaments and
sickness all forgotten! And the joyfl laughter! The continual incitement to laughter! You are to be envied, dear sir, for you have founded
the most agreeable religion in the world: a religon whose founder is
continually honoured by being laughed at.
