PART ONE
ANTHROPOLOGICAL DIDACTIC
ON THE ART OF KNOWING THE INTERIOR AS WELL AS THE EXTERIOR OF MAN
7
 9
First Book
On the Cognitive Faculty
On Being Conscious of One's Self
[127] § 1. The fact that man is aware of an ego-concept raises him infinitely above all other creatures living on earth. Because of this, he is a person; and by virtue of this oneness
of consciousness, he remains one and the same person despite all the vicissitudes which may befall him. He is a being who, by reason of his preeminence and dignity, is wholly
different from things, such as the irrational animals whom he can master and rule at will. He enjoys this superiority even when he cannot yet give utterance to his ego, although it
is already present in his thought, just as all languages must think it when they speak in the first person, even if the language lacks a specific word to refer to this ego-concept. This
faculty (to think) is understanding.
It is noteworthy, however, that the child who already speaks fairly well begins to use the pronoun I rather late (perhaps after a year), in the meantime speaking of himself in the
third person ("Carl wants to eat, go, . . ." etc.). A light seems to dawn upon him when he begins speaking in the first person. From that day on he will never again revert to the
third person. At first the child merely felt himself, now he thinks himself. The explanation of this phenomenon might be rather difficult for the anthropologist.9
 10
The observation that a child does neither weep nor smile until after it is three months old appears to be based on the development of certain notions of offense and injustice, 1
which point toward reason. In this period, when his eyes [128] begin to follow bright objects which are held before him, we have the crude beginnings of a process of broadening
perceptions (the apprehensions of sensory awareness) into a recognition of objects of the senses, that is, of experience.
When the child tries to talk, his mangling of words makes him so lovable to mother and nurse, and makes both of them so well-disposed that they hug and kiss him continually.2
They also thoroughly spoil the little tyrant by catering to his every wish and desire. That the little creature is lovable in the period of the development of his human nature must be
credited to his innocence and the candor of his still stumbling utterances which are free from guilt or deceit. Yet the child's charm must also be credited to the natural inclination
of nurses to care for a creature that flatteringly submits itself completely to the will of someone else. The child does so because he knows that a playtime, the best time of all, will
be granted, and in this way the teacher, who now becomes a child again, enjoys once more the pleasures of childhood.3
The teacher's memory of his own childhood does, however, not reach back to that time, since the time of early childhood is not a time of experiences but rather a time of mere
sporadic perceptions which have not yet been unified by any real concept of an object.4
On Egoism
§ 2. From the day that man begins to speak in the first person, he brings his beloved self to light wherever he can, and his egoism advances unrestrained. If he does not do so
openly (for then the egoism of others may oppose him), his egoism expresses itself
10
 11
covertly and with 5 seeming self-abnegation and pretended modesty in order to ensure for himself a superior value in the judgment of others.
Egoism may be thought of as containing three presumptions: that of reason, that of taste, and that of practical interest, that is, it may be logical, aesthetic, or practical.
The logical egoist considers it unnecessary to test his judgment by the reason of others, as if he had no need of a touchstone (criterium veritatis externum).6 However, it is so
certain that we cannot dispense with this means of ensuring ourselves of the truth of our judgment, that this is perhaps the most important reason why learned people insist so
emphatically on the freedom of writing. If this freedom [129] is denied, we are deprived of an effective means of testing the correctness of our judgment, and we expose ourselves
to error. It should not even be said that a mathematician is privileged to make judgments on his own authority, for if the perceived and verified agreement between the judgments
of one geometer and those of all others who devote themselves with talent and industry to the same subject did not prevail, then even mathematics would not be free from having
somewhere7 fallen into error. There are also8 certain cases where we do not trust solely in the judgment of our own senses, where we find it necessary to inquire of other people if
they seem9 to have had the same impression as ours, for example, whether the ringing of a bell was real or only in our ears. And although, when philosophizing, we are not even
permitted to appeal to the judgments of others for establishing our own (as the jurists do in appealing to those well-versed in law), every writer who finds that no one agrees with
his clearly expressed and important views is suspected by the public10 of being in error.
Therefore, it is a risk to hold a view which conflicts with public opinion, even if it is deemed to be reasonable. Such a display of egoism is called paradoxical.
11
 12
Boldness does not lie in running the risk that the view is untrue, but rather in the risk that the view might be accepted by only a few. Preference for the paradoxical is logical
obstinacy in which a man does not want to be an imitator of others, but rather prefers to appear as an unusual 11 human being. Instead of accomplishing his purpose, such a man
frequently succeeds only in being odd. But, because everyone must have and maintain his own intelligence (Si omnes patres sic, at ego non sic.Abailard),12 the reproach of being
paradoxical, when it is not based on vanity or the desire to be different, carries no bad connotations. Opposite to the paradoxical is the commonplace, which sides with the general
opinion. But with the commonplace there is as little safety, if not less, because it lulls the mind to sleep, whereas the paradox awakens the mind to attention and investigation,
which often lead to discoveries.
The aesthetic egoist is satisfied with his own taste, even though others may dislike, criticize, or even ridicule his verse, his painting, or his music. He deprives himself of the
progress toward improvement when he isolates himself [130] and his own judgment; he applauds himself, and he seeks art's touchstone of beauty only in himself.
Finally, the moral egoist limits all purposes to himself; as a eudaemonist, he concentrates the highest motives of his will merely on profit and his own happiness, but not on theconcept of duty. Because every other person has a different concept of what he counts as happiness, it is exactly egoism which causes him to have no touchstone of a genuine
concept of duty which13 truly must be a universally valid principle. All eudaemonists are consequently egoists.
Egoism can only be contrasted with pluralism, which is a frame of mind in which the self, instead of being enwrapped in itself as if it were the whole world, understands and
behaves itself as a mere citizen of the world. The above is all that belongs to anthropology. The con12
 13
sideration of the contrast between egoism and pluralism from a metaphysical perspective lies beyond the scope of the science with which we are dealing here. If the question were
only whether I, as a thinking being, have any reason to assume that beside my existence there exists a totality of other beings (called the world) with whom I am in relation, then it
is not an anthropological but merely a metaphysical question.
Note On the Formality of Egoistic Language
The language used by the head of state, when speaking of himself to the people, is nowadays in the plural (We, King by the Grace of God . . .). The question arises whether the
meaning of this is not rather egoistic, that is, indicative of the speaker's own authority; the same meaning is expressed by the King of Spain when he refers to himself as Io, el Rey
(I, the King). It appears to be a fact, however, that such formality in speaking about the highest authority was originally to indicate condescension (We, the King and his Counsel,
or Estates). But how does it happen that the reciprocal form of address, which was formerly expressed in the old classical languages by the familiar Thou 14 in the singular, should
later be indicated by the formal You in the plural15 when spoken by various (chiefly German) peoples? For the sake of giving greater distinction to the person addressed, the
German [131] language uses two distinctive expressions, namely he and they16 (as if it were not a form of address at all, but a story about someone17 absent, be it one person or
more18). This has finally led, to complete the absurdity, to the use of such expressions as Your Grace, Right Honorable, Right Noble, High-and-Noble, in which the speaker,
rather than pretending to humble himself before the person addressed, shows deference instead to the abstract quality of his station. Probably all this is the result of feudalism
which saw to it that19 the degree of respect due the socially more distinguished not be vio13
 14
lated in a hierarchy extending from the royal dignity down through all the stages until even human dignity itself ceases and only man remains, that is, down to 20 the position of
serfdom, where a man is addressed by his superiors as you,21 or down to the position of a child who is not allowed to have its own way.
On Being Arbitrarily Conscious of One's Ideas
§ 3. The effort to become conscious of one's sense impressions [ideas] is22 either the perception (attentio) or the abstraction (abstractio) of a sense impression of which I am
conscious within myself. Abstraction is not just a neglect and cessation of perception (since that would be distraction [distractio]), but rather it is a considered act of the faculty of
cognition; it is a sense impression of which I am inwardly conscious, keeping it separate from other sense impressions in my consciousness. Therefore, one does not speak of
abstracting (separating) something, but of abstracting from something, that is, abstracting a definition from the object of my sense impression, whereby the definition preserves the
universality of a concept, and is thus taken into the understanding.
For a man to be able to make an abstraction from a sense impression, even when the sense impression forces itself on his senses, is proof of a far greater faculty than just paying
attention, because it gives evidence of a freedom of the faculty of thought and sovereignty of the mind in having the condition of one's sense impressions under one's control
(animus sui compos). In this respect the faculty of abstraction is much more difficult, but also more important than the faculty of perception when it encounters sense impressions.
Many people are unhappy because they cannot en14
 15
gage in abstraction. Many a suitor could make a good marriage if he could only shut his eyes to a wart [132] on his sweetheart's face or to a gap where teeth are missing. But it is
a peculiarly bad habit of our faculty of perception to observe too closely, even involuntarily, what is faulty in other people. Likewise, it is bad manners to fix one's eyes on the
spot where a button is missing from the coat of a man who is directly in front of us, or upon a missing-tooth gap, or to call attention to a habitual speech defect, or to make the
other person feel uneasy by staring at him and thus ruining any possibility of personal relations with him. If the essentials are good, it is not only fair but wise to shut one's eyes to
the shortcomings of others, as well as to our own good fortune. The capacity to abstract, however, is a power of mind 23 which can only be acquired by exercising it.24On Self-Observation
§ 4. Noticing (animadvertere) oneself is not the same thing as observing (observare) oneself. Observation is a methodical compilation of perceptions which we have experienced.
Such perceptions furnish material for the diary of an observer of the self25 and they may easily lead to wild imaginings and insanity.
The perception (attentio) of oneself when dealing with others is necessary, but it must not be obvious in daily intercourse; if it is noticeable, it makes conversation awkward (a
hindrance) or affected (a mockery). The opposite of both is a free and easy manner (air dégagé), the self-confidence that one's behavior is not going to be criticized unfavorably
by others. He who pretends to judge himself as if he were standing in front of a mirror, and he who speaks as if he heard himself speak (and not simply as if someone else heard
him), is a kind of actor. He wishes to appear as someone, and so he feigns a semblance of his own person. However, on this account,
15
 16
he suffers in the estimation of other persons who perceive his attempt because it arouses the suspicion that he intends to deceive. Candid behavior (a manner which causes no such
suspicion) is called natural behavior (although it does not exclude all fine art and the cultivation of taste). 26 Such behavior pleases because of its simple truth in expression. But
when sincerity appears to proceed from simplicity, that is, because a mode of perception has been neglected which has already been established as a rule, then simplicity is called
naïveté.
[133] The naïve27 manner of revealing one's self as evidenced when a girl is approached by a man for the first time, or when a peasant, unfamiliar with urbane manners, entering
the city for the first time, provokes, because of the person's innocence and simplicity (caused by the lack of the art of pretense), a benevolent smile from those who are already
well versed and adept in this art. Such a smile is not a condemnation, since honesty and sincerity are still respected; it is a good-natured and kindly ridicule at inexperience based
on the evil art of pretense, indicative of our already corrupted human nature. It is an art which should be lamented rather than ridiculed, especially if one compared it with the idea
of a still uncorrupted human nature.* It is a momentary joy, as when a cloudy sky breaks open for an instant and lets a sunbeam through, only to close up at once as if to avoid
hurting the purblind eyes of egoism.
But the real purpose of this section is the previous warning against engaging in deliberate observation and studied compilation of an inner history of the involuntary course of our
thoughts and feelings. The warning is given because deliberate observation is the most direct path to illuminism and terrorism in the confused belief that we are open to higher
inspiration and, without our help, who
* In reference to this, the familiar verse of Persius can be parodied as follows: Naturam videant ingemiscantque relicta. [That they may look on Nature, and sigh because
they have lost herEd.]
16
 17
knows why, are subject to unknown interior 28 forces. In such a situation, without noticing it, we make pretended discoveries of what we ourselves have introduced into our own
minds, like a Bourignon, with flattery, or a Pascal, 29 with terrifying and frightful implications, 30 or as was the case with Albrecht Hailer,31 an otherwise splendid mind, who
while writing the extensive and much-interrupted diary of his spiritual life, finally came to the point of asking a famous theologian, his former academic colleague Doctor Less,32
whether in his extensive store of divine learning he could not find any consolation for his anguished soul.
To scrutinize the various acts of the imagination within me, when I call them forth, is indeed worth reflection, as well as necessary and useful for logic and metaphysics. But to
wish to play the spy upon one's self, when those acts come to mind unsummoned and of their own accord (which happens through the play [134] of the unpremeditatedly creative
imagination), is to reverse the natural order of the cognitive powers, since then the rational elements do not take the lead (as they should) but instead follow behind. This desire for
self-investigation is either already a disease of the mind (hypochondria), or will lead to such a disease and ultimately to the madhouse. He who has a great deal to tell of inner
experiences (for example, of grace, of temptations, etc.) may, in the course of his voyage to self-discovery, have made his first landing only at Anticyra.33 Inner experiences are
not like external experiences of objects in space, wherein the objects appear34 side by side and permanently fixed. The inner sense sees the conditions for its definition only in
Time and, consequently, in a state of flux, which is without that permanence of observation necessary for experience.*
* If we consciously imagine for ourselves the inner action (spontaneity), whereby a concept (a thought) becomes possible, we engage in reflection; if we consciously
imagine for ourselves the susceptibility (receptivity), whereby a perception (perceptio), i.e., empirical observation, becomes possi-
(footnote continued on the next page)
17 18
[135] On the Ideas We Have without Being Aware of Them
§ 5. To have ideas and still not to be conscious of them seems to be a contradiction; for how can we know that we have them unless we are conscious of them? This objection has
already been raised by Locke, 35 who on that account rejected the existence of such a type of ideas. Nevertheless, we can be indirectly conscious of having an idea, although we
are not directly conscious of it. Such ideas are called obscure,36 the others are clear, and when their clarity extends to the components of the whole idea and their combination,
then they are called distinct ideas either of thought or of perception.
Whenever I am conscious of seeing a person in the distant meadow, though I am not aware of seeing his eyes, nose, mouth, and so forth, then I really only conclude that this thing
is a person. If I were to say that I did not have any idea at all of these perceptions (simply because I was not conscious of perceiving these and other
(footnote continued from the previous page)
ble, we engage in apprehension; however, if we consciously imagine both acts, then consciousness of one's self (apperceptio) can be divided into that of reflection and that of
apprehension. Reflection is a consciousness of the understanding, while apprehension is a consciousness of the inner sense; reflection is pure apperception, and apprehension
is empirical apperception; consequently, the former is falsely referred to as the inner sense. In psychology we investigate ourselves according to our perceptions of the inner
sense; but in logic we make the investigation on the grounds of what the intellectual consciousness supplies us with. Here the self appears to us as twofold (which would be
contradictory): (1) the self, as the subject of thinking (in logic), which means pure apperception (the merely reflecting self) of which nothing more can be said, except that it is
an entirely simple perception. (2) The self, as the object of the perception, consequently also part of the inner sense, contains a multiplicity of definitions which make inner
experience possible.
To ask whether or not a man conscious of different inner mental changes (either of his thoughts or of fundamental principles assumed by him) can say that he is the selfsame
man, is an absurd question. For he can be conscious of these changes in the first place only on condition that he represents himself, in the different situations, as one and the
same subject. The human ego is indeed twofold as regards its form (manner of representation), but not with respect to its matter (content).
18
 19
parts of the person), then I would not be able to say that I saw a person. It is these partial ideas that contribute to the entirety of the head or of the person.
Sense perceptions and sensations of which we are not aware but whose existence we can undoubtedly infer, that is, obscure ideas in both man and animals, constitute an
immeasurable field. The clear ideas, on the other hand, contain infinitely few instances of sense perceptions and sensations which reveal themselves to consciousness. It is as if
just a few places on the vast map of our mind were illuminated. This can inspire wonder at our own being; for a higher power would need only cry, ''Let there be light" and then,
without further action (if, for instance, we take an author and find out all that he has stored in his mind), there would be laid open before the eyes half a universe. Everything that
the eye reveals when strengthened by the telescope (perhaps directed toward the moon) or by the microscope (directed upon infusoria) is perceived by the naked eye, for these
optical instruments 37 do not bring more rays of light and subsequently more pictures into [136] the eye. The pictures reflect themselves upon the retina without such ingenious
instruments. They simply enlarge the images so that we become conscious of them. The same thing is true of the sensation of hearing, when the musician plays a phantasy on the
organ with his ten fingers and two feet, while at the same time he is speaking to someone standing beside him. Within a few seconds a host of ideas is awakened in his soul, and
every idea requires special judgment as to its appropriateness, since a single stroke of the finger, not fitted to the harmony, would immediately be heard as a discord. Yet the
whole comes out so well that the improvisator must often wish to have preserved in a score many a passage which he has performed in this happy fashion, but which he could not
have performed so well with real diligence and attention.
Because obscure ideas can only be perceived by man passively as a play of sensations, their theory does not
19
 20
belong to pragmatic anthropology but to physiological anthropology with which we are not properly concerned. 38
We often play with obscure ideas, and we have an interest in removing objects that are liked or disliked by the imagination. But still more often we ourselves become an object of
obscure ideas, and our understanding is unable to rescue itself from absurdities which were caused by those ideas, although we recognize them as an illusion.
Such is the case with sexual love where no benevolence is intended but only the enjoyment of its object. How much cleverness has been wasted in throwing a delicate veil over
man's desires,39 but revealing still enough of man's close relation to the animal kingdom so that bashfulness results. Blunt expressions are replaced by euphemisms in polite
society even though they are transparent enough to inspire a smile. Here the imagination may well walk in obscurity, and it requires an uncommon skill if, in order to avoidcynicism, one does not risk falling into absurd purism.
On the other hand, we are often enough the victims of obscure ideas which are reluctant to vanish even when understanding [137] has thrown light upon them. To arrange for his
grave in his garden or under a shady tree, in a field or in a dry plot of ground, is often a very important affair to a dying man, even though he knows that if he chooses the one, he
has no reason to hope for a nice view; and if he chooses the other, he has no reason to worry about catching a cold.
The saying, "Clothes make the man," holds true in a certain measure even for an intelligent man. The Russian proverb says: "One receives a guest according to his clothes, and
accompanies him according to his understanding. But understanding cannot prevent the obscure impression that a well-dressed person is a person of a certain importance, but the
preliminary judgment may be revised later.
20
 21
Even studied obscurity is often used purposely to reflect profundity and thoroughness in much the same way as objects seen at dusk or in a fog always appear to be larger than
they actually are.* Skotison (make it obscure) is the catchword 40 of all mystics in order to lure with fictitious obscurity those who dig for the hidden treasures of wisdom.41 But
generally the reader welcomes a certain degree of mystery in a manuscript, because he thereby becomes aware of his own intellectual power in resolving the obscure into clear
thoughts.42
On Distinctness and Indistinctness in Relation to the Consciousness of One's Ideas
§ 6. The awareness of one's ideas, sufficient for distinguishing one object from another, is [138] clearness.43 Awareness which makes the composition of ideas clear is called
distinctness. Distinctness alone makes it possible for an aggregate of ideas to become cognition, whereby order is established from manifold ideas, because every conscious
combination presupposes a unity of awareness which in turn supplies the rule for the unity. One cannot contrast clear ideas with confused ones (perceptio confusa); rather, they
must be contrasted with the indistinct (mere clara) ideas. Whatever is con-
* But in looking at an object in daylight, it is apparent that what seems lighter than surrounding objects also seems larger, e.g., white stockings display fuller calves than
black ones. A fire in the night, burning on a high mountain, appears to be larger than one actually finds it to be upon inspection. Perhaps we can also explain in this way
the apparently larger size of the moon [MS and Cassirer; B: the apparent size of the moonEd.] as well as the apparently greater distance between stars close to the horizon.
In both cases shining objects appear to us as being high in the sky. They are objects close to the horizon seen through an obscuring layer of air; and what is dark is judged
smaller because of the light which surrounds it. In target practice, therefore, a dark target with a white circle in the center would be more advantageous for shooting than a
white target with a dark center.
21
 22
fused must be compounded, for within the simple there is neither order nor confusion. Confusion is the cause of indistinctness, not its definition. In every complex idea (perceptio
complexa), and thus in every cognition (which requires both perception and concept), we see that distinctness depends upon the order according to which contributory ideas are
combined (merely considering form) which order gives rise either to a logical division into primary or secondary (perceptio primaria et secundana) ideas or a real division into
principal and accessory ideas (perceptio principalis et adhaerens). Distinct cognition results from order. One can see that if the faculty of cognition is to be called understanding
(in the most general sense of the word), it must contain the faculty of apprehending (attentio) given ideas in order to produce perception; furthermore, it must contain the power of
separating what is common to more than one object (abstractio); in order to produce the concept, it also must contain the faculty of deliberation (reflexio), in order to produce
cognition of an object.
We say that he who possesses these powers to a superior degree has a head; and he who has a small measure of these faculties is called a simpleton, because he always allows
himself to be guided by other persons. But we call him a genius who makes use of originality and produces out of himself what must ordinarily be learned under the guidance of
others.
He who has learned nothing of what must be taught in order to be knowledgeable is called an ignoramus, if he has been expected to know because of his claim to be a man of
learning. Without such a claim he may still be a genius. He who cannot think for himself, though he can learn much, is limited (warped). One can be a person of vast learning (a
machine for the instruction of others, teaching what one has once been taught) and still be limited in reference to the rational [139] use of his actual knowledge. The pedant is the
one whose conversation on what he has learned betrays academic constraint
22
 23and consequently a lack of independent thought. This is so whether he is a scholar, a soldier, or even a courtier. Of all kinds of pedants the most tolerable is the learned pedant,
because we can still learn from him. On the other hand, in a courtier scrupulousness in formalities (pedantries) is not merely useless, but, in view of the pride inevitably exhibited
by the pedant, also ridiculous since it is the pride of an ignoramus.
The art, or rather the skill, of speaking in the socially proper tone, and appearing up-to-date, especially when the conversation is about science, is falsely called popularity, but
should rather be called polished superficiality because it frequently cloaks the paltriness of a narrow-minded person. Only children can be fooled by this. Addison had the Quaker
say to the constantly talking officer who was traveling with him in the coach: "Thy drum is a symbol of thee, it soundeth because it is empty." 44
In order to judge men according to their cognitive faculty (according to their understanding as such) we make a division into two classes: those to whom must be attributed
common sense (sensus communis), which certainly is not common (sensus vulgaris), and men of science. People with common sense are familiar with the principles relating to
practical application (in concreto).45 Scientific people are familiar with the principles themselves prior to their application (in abstracto). The understanding, which belongs to the
first cognitive capacity, is sometimes called horse sense (bon sens), 46 whereas the understanding belonging to the second cognitive faculty we call perspicuity (ingenium
perspicax). It is noteworthy that we interpret horse sense, which is generally considered only as practical cognition, not just as an understanding which can exist without
cultivation, but rather as an understanding to which cultivation can be a hindrance if it is not conscientiously followed through. Some praise this understanding fanatically and
represent47 it as a storehouse of treasures hidden in the depths of the mind.
23
 24
Sometimes we even interpret the dictum of horse sense as an oracle (the genius of Socrates) which is more accurate than anything that erudite wisdom has to offer. So much is
certain, that, whenever the answer to a question rests upon general and innate rules of the understanding (the possession of which is called native intelligence), we may be sure
that seeking for studied and artifically established principles [140] (school learning), and forming a conclusion accordingly, is less reliable than gradually coming to a conclusion
from the grounds of judgment which lie in the dark recesses of the mind. This may be called logical tact, in which reflection looks at the object from many angles and produces
the correct result without being aware of the acts occurring within the mind during this process. 48
Horse sense, however, can demonstrate this superiority only with regard to an object of experience. In this way it not only grows in knowledge but even extends experience itself;
not, however, in a speculative, but only in an empirico-practical respect. For in the speculative employment of understanding, scientific principles a priori are required, while in
the empirico-practical49 employment of understanding it is possible to have experiences, that is, judgments, which are continually confirmed by experiment and result.
On Sensibility in Contrast to Understanding50
§ 7. With respect to the state of its ideas, my mind is either active, and shows a capacity (facultas) for accomplishment, or it is passive, and continues in a receptive capacity
(receptivitas). Cognition contains a union of both states of ideas. The possibility of having such a cognition bears the name of cognitive faculty, a term derived from its most
important part,
24
 25
namely, the activity of the mind in combining or separating ideas.
Ideas with respect to which the mind is passive, and by which the subject is therefore affected (whether it affects itself or is affected by an object), belong to the sensual cognitive
faculty. But ideas which involve a pure activity (that is, thinking) belong to the intellectual cognitive faculty. The first is called the lower; the other, the higher cognitive faculty.
51* The sensual cognition has the character [141] of passivity toward the inner sense of awareness, while intellectual cognition has the character of spontaneity52 of apperception,
that is, of the pure consciousness of the act which constitutes thought and appertains to logic (a system of the rules of the understanding). Passivity, in turn, belongs to the field of
psychology (a summary of all inner perceptions under the laws of nature). Psychology is the foundation of inner experience.
Remark
The object of an idea, which comprises only the manner in which I am affected by the object, can be recognized by me only as it appears to me. All experience (empirical
cognition), the inner not less than the outer, is nothing but the cognition of objects as they appear to us, not as they are (when considered by themselves). Not
* To posit sensibility only in the obscurity of ideas, and intellectuality in distinctness, and thereby merely positing a formal (logical) distinction of cognition instead of a
real (psychological) distinction, which not only refers to the form, but also to the content of thinking, has been a great mistake of the Leibniz-Wolff school. The error
consisted in attributing a deficiency (as to clarity and constituent ideas) to sensibility and thus associating it with indistinctness, whereas the nature of rational ideas was
understood to be distinct on the grounds that sensibility is something very positive and an indispensable ingredient of rational ideas for the process of producing cognition.Leibniz is really the one to blame. As a Platonist, he posited innate, pure perceptions of understanding, called ideas, which are encountered, though only obscurely, in the
human mind. By applying our intellectual awareness to the analysis and elucidation of Platonic ideas, we are said to arrive at the cognition of objects as they really are.
25
 26
only the quality of the idea, but also the quality of the subject and its susceptibility is important in determining the kind of sensual perception on which the thought process
concerning the object (the concept of the object) bases itself. The formal character of this receptivity cannot be borrowed from the senses; it must be given a priori, that is, it must
be a sense perception which remains after everything empirical (the content of sense perception) is taken away; in inner experiences, this formal factor of intuition is Time. 53
Experience is empirical cognition, but cognition (dependent as it is on judgments) requires reflection (reflexio), and consequently consciousness of activity54 in arranging the
multitude of ideas according to a rule of unity,55 that is, a concept; and, finally, it requires thought as such (which makes it different from sense perception). On this account
consciousness is divided into the discursive (which, being logical, must take the lead because it provides the rule) and intuitive consciousness. Discursive consciousness (the pure
apperception of its mental activity) is simple. The "I" of reflection contains no manifold within itself, and is always one and the same in every judgment, because it contains
merely the formal part of consciousness. On the other hand, inner experience contains the material of itself as well as a manifold of the [142] empirical, inner perception, that is,
the "I" of apprehension (hence an empirical apperception).
I, as a thinking being and as a being endowed with senses, am one and the same subject.56 However, as an object of inner empirical intuition, so far as I am inwardly affected by
temporal sensations (simultaneous or successive), I cognize myself only as I appear to myself, not as a thing-in-itself.57 Such cognition depends on a temporal condition which is
no concept of the understanding (hence not mere spontaneity), and hence is a condition in regard to which my faculty of ideas is passive. It is a condition that belongs to
receptivity. Therefore, through inner experience I always know myself only as I appear to
26
 27
myself. This axiom has frequently been distorted to read: It only seems to me (mihi videri) that I have definite ideas and sensations, and that, indeed, I only appear to exist. This
illusion is the basis of erroneous judgment emanating from subjective causes falsely treated as objective. Appearance, however, is no judgment, but merely empirical intuition
which, through reflection and concept of the understanding resulting therefrom, becomes inner experience and consequently truth.
The cause of these errors lies in the fact that the terms inner sense and apperception are generally considered synonymous by psychologists, although inner sense should designate
only psychological (applied) consciousness, while apperception should designate logical (pure) consciousness. From this it is evident that the only perception we have of ourselves
by means of the inner sense is of how we appear to ourselves, because apprehension (apprehensio) of impressions of the inner sense presupposes a formal condition of the inner
perception of a subject. The condition is Time, which certainly is not a concept of the understanding. It is merely a subjective condition by which inner sensations are given to us
in consequence of the nature of the human soul. Thus it is not without our power to know what an object is in itself.
This note does not really belong to anthropology. In anthropology, experiences are appearances united according to the laws (rules) of the understanding, and no question is asked
concerning the manner of representing things as they are apart from their relation to the senses 58 (as [143] they are in themselves). This investigation belongs to metaphysics
which has to do with the possibility of knowledge a priori. Nevertheless, it was necessary to go back as far as we did just to avoid the mistakes of the speculative mind with regard
to this question. On the whole, knowledge of man through inner experience, according to which he judges others, is of great importance and perhaps even more difficult to achieve
than the
27
 28
ability to judge others correctly, in that the one who investigates his inner consciousness easily carries many things into his own self-consciousness instead of simply observing
what is there. On this account it is advisable and even necessary to begin with observed phenomena within oneself before proceeding to make exact statements concerning man's
nature, that is, before proceeding to the study of inner experience.
Apology for Sensibility
§ 8. Understanding is highly esteemed by everyone. Its very definition as the higher cognitive faculty only goes to show that whoever ventures to praise it would be sent away with
the same ridicule earned by an orator praising virtue: Stulte! quis unquam vituperavit. 59 Sensibility, on the other hand, is in bad repute. We say uncomplimentary things, such as
(1) that it confuses the power of imagination; (2) that it boasts, and is like a sovereign mistress, stubborn and hard to subdue, whereas it ought to be only the handmaid of the
understanding; (3) that it is even deceptive, so that we cannot be sufficiently on our guard where it is concerned.60 Yet sensibility is not without praise, especially among poetsand people of good taste. They highly esteem the figurative representation of ideas not only as a gain, but because in this way concepts need not be analyzed into their constituent
parts with painstaking care to express the full meaning of a thought or the emphasis (the force) of speech and the self-evidence (the clarity in consciousness) of sensibility. They
declare that understanding without adornment is a deficiency.* We
* Since we are speaking here only of the cognitive faculty, and, therefore, of ideas (not of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure), sensibility will mean nothing more than
sense perception (empirical perception [MS: sense-perceptionEd.]) in distinction to concepts (pertaining to thoughts) as well as pure perception (pertaining to the
perception of Space and Time).
28
 29
do not need panegyrists here, but only someone to act as a defender of sensibility against the accuser.
[114] The passive element in sensibility, which we cannot ignore, is really the cause of all the difficulties we ascribe to it. The inner perfection of man consists in having the power
to use all his faculties, a power to subject their use to his own free volition. For this, it is necessary that the understanding should rule without weakening sensibility (which in
itself is like a mob of people since it does not think) because without sensibility no material would be provided for the use of the law-giving understanding.
Justification of Sensibility Against the First Indictment
§ 9. The senses do not confuse. We cannot say of a person who grasps, but has not yet ordered, a given manifold, that he confuses it. Perceptions of the senses (empirical ideas
with consciousness) can only be called inner phenomena. Only the understanding, which joins perceptions and combines them under a rule of thought, by introducing order into
the manifold, establishes them as empirical cognition, that is, experience. The understanding is, therefore, neglecting its duty if it judges rashly, without having arranged sense
impressions according to concepts, and then later complains of their state of confusion, which it blames on man's sensual nature. This reproach applies equally to the unfounded
complaint concerning the confusion of outer as well as inner perceptions through sensibility.
Sense perceptions certainly precede perceptions of the understanding and display themselves en masse. Yet the harvest [Ertrag] is more abundant when the understanding with its
order and intellectual form is added. The same is true when, for example, the understanding brings into consciousness significant expressions for the
29
 30
concept, emphatic perceptions for the feeling, and interesting 61 perceptions for the determination of the will. The riches, which rhetoric and poetry place before the understanding
all at once [145] (en masse) often embarrass the understanding if it tries to clarify and explain all the acts of reflection which it performs, even obscurely, in such a process.62
Sensibility, however, is not to blame. On the contrary, it is to be esteemed for having presented abundant material to the understanding, in comparison with which its abstract
concepts are often very paltry indeed.
Justification of Sensibility Against the Second Indictment
§ 10. The senses do not control the understanding. They, on the contrary, offer themselves to the understanding only for the sake of being put to work in its service. That the
senses do not wish to have their significance misunderstood, a significance which belongs to them specifically in what we call the common sense of human intelligence (sensus
communis), is a fact that cannot be interpreted as an arrogant intention to dominate the understanding. There are judgments which, in view of the fact that they are not brought
formally to the tribunal63 of the understanding for final decision, appear to be dictated directly by sense. They are embodied in so-called mottoes or oracular outbursts (such as
those to whose utterance Socrates ascribed his own genius). It is thereby supposed that our first judgment about that which is wise and just to do on a particular occasion is
generally the correct one and that pondering over it will only lead to something artificial. These judgments, however, do not actually come from the senses; instead, they proceed
from real, though obscure, deliberations of the understanding. The senses make no claim in this respect; they are like the common people, though not like the rabble (ignobile
vulgus), who are happily willing to subor30
 31
dinate themselves to their superior, the understanding, as long as they are listened to. However, if certain judgments and insights are regarded as proceeding directly from the inner
sense, without the mediation of understanding, and if these are further regarded as governing themselves so that sensations are passed off as judgments, we have nothing but that
fanaticism which is akin to insanity.
[146] Justification of Sensibility Against the Third Indictment§ 11. 64 The senses do not deceive. This statement is the rejection of the most important, as well as, strictly speaking, the emptiest reproach which can be directed against the
senses; not because they do not judge correctly, but because they do not judge at all. For this reason error must always be charged to the understanding. Sensible appearances
(species, apparentia), however, turn to the understanding, if not for justification, at least for vindication. Thus man often mistakes the subjective for the objective. (He thinks a
distant tower is round if he sees no corners on it. He believes the sea to be higher than its shore [altum mare] when the distant65 water meets the eye through rays of light more
sharply bent. The full moon seems to be farther away and therefore larger when he sees it ascend at the horizon through a hazy atmosphere than when it is high in the heavens,
although he catches sight of it from the same visual angle.)66 Thus man takes appearance for experience. In this way man errs, not through any shortcoming of his senses, but
through a failure of his understanding.
Logic charges sensibility with the flaw that cognition, as it is advanced by logic, is associated with shallowness (individuality and limitation to the particular), whereas
understanding which tends toward the universal, and therefore has to accommodate itself with abstrac31
 32
tions, is associated with denseness. The aesthetic treatment, whose first claim is popularity, follows a course on which both fallacies can be avoided.
On the Potentiality of the Cognitive Faculty
§ 12. 67 The preceding section, which dealt with the faculty of appearance, concentrated on aspects which no man can control. It leads us to a discussion of the concepts of the
easy [leicht] and the difficult [schwer], which literally signify in German only material conditions and powers. But in Latin (leve et grave),68 by an exact analogy, they should
signify [147] that which can be done (facile) and that which, relatively speaking, cannot be done (difficile). What is scarcely possible of being done is regarded as subjectively
impracticable69 by a creature who doubts whether he has the necessary ability to perform in certain situations and relationships.
Facility in doing something (promptitudo) must not be confused with readiness in such actions (habitus). Facility signifies a certain degree of mechanical ability, the ''I can if I
want to" indicating a subjective possibility. Readiness signifies subjective-practical necessity,70 that is, habit, which signifies a positive degree of the will acquired through the oftrepeated use of one's faculty, "I want to because duty asks me to." We cannot explain virtue by saying that it is readiness for free and lawful actions, because virtue would then be
a mere mechanism of applying power. Virtue, on the contrary, is moral strength in pursuit of one's duty,71 a duty which should never be a matter of habit, but should always
proceed, fresh and original, from one's mode of thought.
The easy is contrasted with the difficult, but many times it is contrasted with the burdensome as well. Whatever requires for its accomplishment a great deal less
32
 33
power of application than a subject has at his command is regarded by him as easy. What is easier than going through the formalities of social visits, of congratulations, and of
condolences? But what is more demanding for a busy man? They are friendship's vexations (drudgeries) from which everyone heartily wishes to be free. And yet everyone has
scruples against violating such social customs.
What vexations there are in the external customs which are thought to belong to religion, but which in reality are related to ecclesiastical form! The merits of piety have been set
up in such away that the ritual is of no use at all except for the simple submission of the believers to ceremonies and observances, expiations and mortifications (the more the
better). But such compulsory services, which are mechanically easy (because no vicious inclination is thus sacrificed), must be found morally very difficult and burdensome to the
rational man. When, therefore, the great moral 72 teacher said, "My commandments are not difficult,"73 he did not mean that they require only limited exercise of strength in
order to be fulfilled. As a matter of fact, as commandments which require pure dispositions of the heart, they are the hardest that can be given. Yet, for [148] a rational man, they
are nevertheless infinitely easier to keep than the commandments involving activity which accomplishes nothing (gratis anhelare, multa agendo nihil agere),74 like those upon
which Judaism is built. Even the mechanically easy feels like lifting hundredweights to the rational man when he sees that all the energy spent is wasted.
To make the difficult easy is meritorious. To depict what is difficult as easy, although one is not able to accomplish it himself, is deception. There is no merit in doing what is
easy. Methods and machines, and among these the division of labor among various craftsmen, make many things easy which would be hard to do with one's hands without other
tools.
To point out difficulties before one gives the order
33 34
to go ahead with the task (as for example, in metaphysical investigations) may have the effect of a deterrent, but it is better than concealing the difficulties. He who regards
everything he wants to do as easy is reckless; he who performs everything he does with ease is adept; while he whose work shows signs of great labor is awkward. The social
exchange of ideas (conversation) is merely a game wherein everything has to be easy and has to appear easy. Ceremonious (stiff) conversation, for example, the pompous "goodbye" when one makes a departure after a banquet, should be abolished as something antiquated.
According to the difference in temperament, the mental disposition of people differs when they are faced with a business undertaking. Some begin with difficulties and fears (the
melancholic), while others (the sanguine) are at once inspired by the hope and assumed easiness of completing the job.
But what shall we say of the vainglorious boaster, whose claim is not founded on mere temperament"What man wants to do, he can do"? This is just a high-sounding tautology.
What he wants to do upon the command of his morally commanding reason is exactly what he ought to do. Consequently, it is what he can do (since reason would not command
him to do the impossible). Yet, a few years ago, there were such fools who extolled this high-sounding tautology even in a physical sense, announcing themselves as worldassailants, but this breed has long since disappeared.
Habit (consuetudo) finally makes the endurance of evil easy (which, under the name of patience, is falsely honored as a virtue), because sensations of the same type, when
continued without alteration for a long time, draw our attention away from the senses so that we are scarcely conscious of them at all. [149] On the other hand, habit also makes
the consciousness and the remembrance of good that has been received more difficult, which then gradually leads to ingratitude ( a real vice). 75
Customary habit (assuetudo), however, is a physical
34
 35
and inner compulsion to proceed farther in the very same way in which we have been traveling. Acquired habit deprives good actions of their moral value because it undermines
mental freedom and, moreover, it leads to thoughtless repetitions of the same acts (monotony), and thus becomes ridiculous. Customary expletives (clichés used merely to stuff the
emptiness of thoughts) make the listener apprehensive that he will have to hear these favorite expressions over and over, and they make the orator into a talking-machine. The
reason for being disgusted with someone's acquired habits lies in the fact that the animal here predominates over the man, so that instinctively, according to the rule of acquired
habit, that person is categorized as another nature, a nonhuman nature, so that he runs the risk of falling into the same class with the beast. Nevertheless, certain continued practices
may be started intentionally and kept up when Nature refuses help to the free will; for example, to become accustomed in old age to the time of eating and sleeping, or to the
quality and quantity of food, or sleep, thus making it gradually mechanical. But this is the exception to the rule, and it occurs only in a case of necessity. Generally, all acquired
habits are objectionable.
On the Artificial Games Played with Sensory Perceptions
§ 13. 76 Delusion (praestigiae), to which the understanding is subjected by sense perception, may be either natural or artificial; it is either illusion (illusio) or deception (fraus).
The delusion whereby we are forced to accept as real, by the evidence of our eyes, something which we declare to be impossible through the use of our understanding, is called
optical delusion (praestigiae).
Illusion is that visual error which persists although
35
 36
we know at the same time that the supposed object is not real. This caprice [150] of the mind is very agreeable to the senses and is amusing when, for example, we look at the
perspective drawings of the interior of a temple, or as Raphael Mengs 77 says about the painting from the school of the Peripatetics (I think he refers to Correggio): "If we look at
them long enough, the people seem to walk"; or, we are tempted to try to mount the painted steps through the half-open door in Amsterdam's town hail.
Deception of the senses exists when the appearance vanishes as soon as we know the nature of the object. It is the same with all kinds of sleight of hand. Clothing whose color
attractively sets off one's complexion constitutes an illusion, while makeup is a deception; we are misled by the former and mocked by the latter. Thus it happens that we do not
like statues of men or animals which have been painted in natural colors, because we are constantly78 deceived into treating them as living, whenever we come upon them
unexpectedly.
Fascination (fascinatio) in an otherwise sound mental state is a delusion of the senses about which it is said that the senses are not dealing with natural things. The senses seem to
contradict each other because the judgment that an object (or a characteristic of it) exists is irresistibly changed after closer attention to the judgment that the object does not exist
(or if, then in a different shape). It is like a bird that flits against a mirror in which he sees himself, sometimes thinking that the reflection is another bird, sometimes that it is not.Such games, in which men do not trust their own senses, occur especially in those who are intensely dominated by passion. There is the case of the lover who (according to
Helvétius)79 saw his beloved in the arms of another. The beloved, who plainly deceived him, was able to say: "You faithless one, you do not love me any more. You believe what
you see, instead of what I tell you!" More insolent, at least more injurious, has been the deception practiced by ventriloquists, gassnerists, mesmerists, and other pre36
 37
tended necromancers. 80 In olden times ignorant women who pretended to do something supernatural were believed to be witches; and even in this century belief in witchcraft has
not been fully rooted out.* It seems that the feeling of wonder at [151] something unprecedented has in itself much that is alluring to weak minds. This is not because new
prospects are suddenly opened to him, but because the weak person is seduced by them into escaping from the tiresome work of understanding and into making others as ignorant
as himself.81
On the Admissible Moral Perception
§ 14.82 Collectively, the more civilized men are, the more they are actors. They assume the appearance of attachment, of esteem for others, of modesty, and of disinterestedness,
without ever deceiving anyone, because everyone understands that nothing sincere is meant. Persons are familiar with this, and it is even a good thing that this is so in this world,
for when men play these roles, virtues are gradually established, whose appearance had up until now only been affected. These virtues ultimately will become part of the actor's
disposition. To deceive the deceiver in ourselves, or the tendency to deceive, is a fresh return to obedience under the
* In this very century a Protestant clergyman testifying in Scotland as a witness in such a case, said to the judge: "Your Honor, I assure you on my priestly word that this
woman is a witch." The judge replied: "And I assure you on my judicial word that you are no magician yourself." The word Hexe (witch) has now become a German word.
It derives from the first words of the Mass formula used at the Consecration of the Host which the faithful behold with bodily eyes as a small disc of bread. After the
formula has been pronounced, however, the faithful must look upon the bread with spiritual eyes as the body of a man. The words hoc est have been associated with the
word corpus; thus hoc est corpus was changed to hocus-pocus. I suppose this resulted from pious reticence at saying and profaning the actual words, just as the
superstitious are accustomed to do in the face of supernatural objects, in order to avoid sacrilege. [The etymology of Hexe (witch) today is assumed to derive from Hag
(fence, hedge, little forest). Therefore Hexe is a demonic woman inhabiting such an areaEd.]
37
 38
law of virtue. It is not a deception, but rather a blameless 83 deluding of ourselves.
There is a disgust of one's own existence, which arises from the emptiness of mind toward the sensations for which the mind continually strives, that is caused by boredom. One
grows weary of inactivity, that is, the weariness of all occupation that could be called work, and which could drive away that disgust because it is associated with hardship, a
highly contrary feeling, whose original cause is none other than a natural inclination toward being at ease (rest without preceding fatigue). This inclination, however, is deceptive
even with regard to the purpose which [152] the human reason ordains for man, namely, self-contentment, when he does nothing at all (when he vegetates without purpose),
because he assumes that he can do nothing evil in this state. This inclination toward further self-deception (which can be achieved by concentrating one's attention on the fine arts
or, more effectively, through social activities) is called passing the time (tempus fallere). Here, indeed, the expression signifies the intention, which is really an inclination to selfdeception through lazy inactivity, when the mind amuses itself by dallying with the fine arts, or when at least a mental cultivation is effected by a peaceful effort, which is
pointless in itself; otherwise it would be called killing time. Force accomplishes nothing in the struggle against sensuality in the inclinations; instead we must outwit these
inclinations, and, as Swift says, in order to save the ship,84 we must fling an empty tub to a whale, so that he can play with it.
Nature has wisely implanted in man the propensity85 to easy self-deception in order to save, or at least lead man to, virtue. Good and honorable formal behavior is an external
appearance which instills respect in others (an appearance which does not demean). Womankind is not at all satisfied when the male sex does not appear to admire her charms.
Modesty (pudicitia), however, is self-constraint which conceals passion;86 nevertheless, as
38
 39
an illusion it is beneficial, for it creates the necessary distance between the sexes so that we do not degrade the one as a mere instrument of pleasure for the other. In general,
everything that we call decency (decorum) is of the same sort; it is just a beautiful illusion.
Politeness (politesse) 87 is an appearance of affability which instills affection. Bowing and scraping (compliments) and all courtly gallantry, together with the warmest verbal
assurances of friendship, are not always completely truthful. "My dear friends," says Aristotle, "there is no friend."88 But these demonstrations of politeness do not deceivebecause everyone knows how they should be taken, especially because signs of well-wishing and respect, though originally empty, gradually lead to genuine dispositions of this
sort.
Every human virtue in circulation is small change; only a child takes it for real gold. Nevertheless, it is better to circulate pocket pieces than nothing at all. In the end, they can be
converted into [153] genuine gold coin, though at a considerable discount. To pass them off as nothing but counters which have no value, to say with the sarcastic Swift89 that
"Honesty [is] a pair of Shoes worn out in the Dirt," and so forth, or to slander even a Socrates (as the preacher Hofstede90 did in his attack on Marmontel's Belisar), for the sake
of preventing anyone from believing in virtue, all this is high treason perpetrated upon humanity. Even the appearance of the good in others must have value for us, because in the
long run something serious can come from such a play with pretenses91 which gain respect even if they do not deserve to. Only the illusion of the good inside ourselves must be
wiped out, and the veil, with which self-love conceals our moral infirmity, must be torn away. The appearance is deceptive if one pretends that one's guilt can be erased, simply
cast off, by doing something that is without moral value, or one can convince oneself of being in no way in the wrong. Good examples of repentance of sins at the end of life are
represented as actual improvement, or
39
 40
willful transgression is represented as human weakness. 92
On the Five Senses93
§ 15.94 Sensibility in the cognitive faculty (the faculty of intuitive ideas) is twofold: sense and imagination. Sense is the faculty of intuition in the presence of an object.
Imagination is intuition without the presence of the object. The senses, however, are in turn divided into outer and inner (sensus internus). The outer sense is where the human
body is affected by physical things. The inner sense is where the human body is affected by the mind. It should be noticed that this inner sense, as a bare faculty of perception (of
the empirical intuition), must be regarded as differing from the feeling of pleasure and pain, that is, from the susceptibility of the subject to be determined through certain ideas for
the conservation or rejection of the condition of these ideas, which might be called the interior sense (sensus interior). An idea that comes through the senses, and of which one is
conscious as it arises, is specifically called sensation, when at the same time the perception centers our attention on the state of the subject.
§ 16.95 To begin with, we can divide the senses of physical sensation into those of [154] the sensation of vitality (sensus vagus), and those of organic sensation (sensus fixus), and,
since they are met with only where there are nerves, into those which affect the whole system of nerves, and those which affect only those nerves which belong to a certain
member of the body. The sensations of warmth and cold, even those which are aroused by the mind (for example, through quickly rising hope or fear), belong to the vital sense.
The shudder which seizes men even at the idea of something sublime, and the terror, with which nurses' tales drive children to
40
 41
bed late at night, belong to the latter type. They penetrate the body to the center of life. 96
The organic senses, however, so far as they relate to external sensation, we can conveniently reckon as five, no more and no less.
Three of them are more objective than subjective, that is, they contribute, as empirical intuition, more to the cognition of the exterior object, than they arouse the consciousness of
the affected organ. Two, however, are more subjective than objective, that is, the idea obtained from them is more an idea of enjoyment, rather than the cognition of the external
object. Consequently, we can easily agree with others in respect to the three objective senses. But with respect to the other two, the manner in which the subject responds can be
quite different from whatever the external empirical perception and designation of the object might have been.
The senses of the first class are (1) touch (tactus), (2) sight (visus), (3) hearing (auditus). Of the latter class are (A) taste (gustus), (B) smell (olfactus). All together they are senses
of organic sensation which correspond in number to the inlets from the outside, provided by nature so that the creature is able to distinguish between objects.
On the Sense of Touch
§ 17.97 The sense of touch lies in the fingertips and their nerve endings (papillae), and enables us to discover the form of a solid body by means of contact with its surface.
Nature seems to have endowed man alone with this organ, so that he is enabled to form a concept of a body by touching it on all sides. The antennae of insects [155] seem merely
to show the presence of an object; they are not designed to explore its form. This sense is also the only one of immediate external perception; therefore, it is the most important
and the most reliably instructive of all senses. Nevertheless, it is
41 42
also the clumsiest because the matter whose surface is to inform us about the shape of the object has to be solid. (In respect to the vital sensation, we are not now concerned with
whether or not the surface is hard or soft, much less whether or not it feels warm or cold.) Without this sense organ we would be unable to develop a concept of any bodily form,
and it is to the perceptions of this sense that the other two senses of the first class 98 must originally be referred in order to produce empirical knowledge.
On Hearing
§ 18.99The sense of hearing is one of the senses of merely indirect perception. Through the air which surrounds us, and by means of it, a distant object is perceived to a large
extent. Through this medium, which is set in motion by the mouth, the organ of speech, people are most easily and completely able to share their thoughts and feelings with
others. This is particularly true when the sounds intended to be heard by others are clearly articulated and systematically combined with the understanding into language. The form
of an object is not given through hearing, and sounds of speech do not lead to a direct idea of what the form is. Because sounds are nothing in themselves or at any rate not
objects, but merely signs of inner feelings, they are the best means of expressing concepts. Persons born deaf, who must therefore remain speechless, can never arrive at anything
more than an analogue of reason.
Music, as a regular play of auditory sensations, is, so to speak, a language of mere sensations (devoid of any concepts). The sense of vitality is not only inspired indescribably and
diversely by music, but it is also strengthened. The sounds are tones, and they are for hearing what colors are for sight. Music is a communication of feelings in the distance to all
present within the
42
 43
surrounding space, and it is a social pleasure which is not diminished by the fact that many people participate in it.
[156] On the Sense of Sight
§ 19. 100 Sight is a sense of indirect perception appearing to a certain organ (the eyes) sensitive to agitated matter, namely light, which is not, like sound, just a wavelike
disturbance of a fluid element101 that spreads itself on all sides in surrounding space. Rather, light is an emanation by which the locus of an object in space is determined, and by
means of which the structure of the universe becomes known to us to such an immeasurable extent that, especially in the case of the fixed stars, when we compare their distance
with our terrestrial standards, we become fatigued with the long row of figures. We have almost more cause to be astonished at the delicate sensitivity of the eye in perceiving
such weakened impressions than at the magnitude of the object (the structure of the universe), especially when we look at the universe in detail with the help of the microscope,
for example, when we examine infusoria. The sense of sight, while not more indispensable than the sense of hearing, is, nevertheless, the noblest, since, among all the senses, it is
farthest removed from the sense of touch, which is the most limited condition of perception. Not only does sight have the greatest radius of perception in space, but it also receives
its sense organ as being least involved (because otherwise it would not be mere sight). Consequently, it comes nearer to being a pure intuition (the immediate idea of a given
object without admixture of evident sensation).
These three outer senses lead the subject through reflection to cognition of the object as something outside ourselves. When the sensation, however, becomes so strong that the
awareness of the activity of the organ becomes stronger than the awareness of the relation to an
43
 44
external object, then outer perceptions are changed into inner perceptions. To notice smoothness or roughness in what we touch is quite different from inquiring about the shape of
an external body. The same holds true when someone speaks so loud that it hurts the ears, so to speak; or, when someone blinks his eyes while stepping from a dark room into the
bright sunshine. The latter will be blind for a few moments because of the strong [157] and sudden light; the former will be deaf because of the shrieking voice. Both persons are
unable to attain a concept of the object because of the intensity of the sense impression; their attention centers only on the subjective idea, namely, the modification of the organ.
On the Senses of Taste and Smell
§ 20. 102 The senses of taste and smell are both more subjective than objective. The sense of taste is activated when the organ of the tongue, the gullet, and the palate come into
touch with an external object. The sense of smell is activated by drawing in air which is mixed with alien vapors; the body itself from which the vapors emanate may be distant
from the sensory organ.103 Both senses are closely related, and he who is deficient in the sense of smell is likewise weak in taste. Neither of the two senses can lead by itself to
the cognition of the object without the help of one of the other senses; for example,104 one can say that both are affected by salts (stable and volatile) of which one must be
broken up by liquefaction in the mouth, the other by air which has to penetrate the organ, in order to allow its specific sensation to reach it.
General Remarks Concerning the External Senses§ 21.105 We may divide the sensations of the external senses into those of mechanical and those of chemical operation. To the mechanical belong
44
 45
the three higher senses, to the chemical the two lower senses. The first three senses are those of perception (of the surface), while the other two are senses of pleasure (of innermost
sensation). Therefore it happens that nausea, a stimulus to rid oneself of food the quickest way through the gullet by vomiting, is given to man as such a strong vital 106 sensation,
since such an internal feeling can be dangerous to the animal.
However, there is also a pleasure of the intellect, consisting in the communication of thought. But when it is forced upon us, the mind finds it repugnant107 and it ceases to be
nutritive as food for the intellect. (A good example of this is the constant repetition of amusing or witty quips, which can become indigestible through sameness.) Thus the natural
instinct [158] to be free of it is by analogy called nausea, although it belongs to the inner sense.
Smell is, so to speak, taste at a distance, and other people are forced to share a scent whether they want to or not. Hence, by interfering with individual freedom, smell is less
sociable than taste; when confronted with many dishes and bottles, one can choose that which suits his pleasure without forcing others to participate in that pleasure. Filth seems
to awaken nausea less through what is repulsive to eye and tongue than through the stench associated with it. Internal penetration (into the lungs) through smell is even more
intimate than through the absorptive vessels of mouth or gullet.
The more strongly the senses themselves feel affected by the intensity of the inflow which comes to them, the less information they provide. On the other hand, if they are
expected to yield a great deal of information, they must be affected moderately. In the strongest light we see (distinguish) nothing; and a stentorian, forced voice stupefies
(suppresses thought).
The more susceptible to impressions the vital sense (that is, the more delicate and sensitive), the more unfortunate is the man.108 The more susceptible man is toward
45
 46
the organic sense (the more sensitive), and, on the other hand, the more callous he is toward the vital sense, the more fortunate he is. I say more fortunate, certainly not morally
better, for he has the feeling of his own well-being more under control. The capacity for sensation derived from the subject's own power (sensibilitas sthenica) may be called
delicate sensitivity; that coming from the subject's weakness which cannot adequately withstand the penetration of sense impressions into consciousness, that is, attending to sense
impressions against one's will, can be called tender-hearted submission (sensibilitas asthenica). 109
Questions
§ 22.110 To which organic sense do we owe the least and which seems to be the most dispensable? The sense of smell. It does not pay us to cultivate it or to refine it in order to
gain enjoyment; this sense can pick up more objects of aversion than of pleasure (especially in crowded places) and, besides, the pleasure coming from the sense of smell cannot
be other than fleeting and transitory. Yet as a negative condition of well-being, this sense is not unimportant, as, for example, when it warns us not to [159] breathe noxious air
(such as vapor from a stove, or the stench from a swamp or from dead animals), or keeps us from eating rotten food. The second pleasure-sense, the sense of taste, is of similar
importance; it has, however, the specific advantage of furthering companionship in eating, something the sense of smell does not do; moreover, taste is superior because by
anticipation it judges the benefit of food beforehand, at the very gate of entrance to the alimentary canal. The benefit of food is closely linked with a rather certain prediction of
pleasure as long as luxury and indulgence have not overrefined the sense. In the case of people who are ill, the appetite, which is usually of benefit to them
46
 47
and something of a medicine, fails in its function. Smell of food is, so to speak, a foretaste, and to the hungry man it is an invitation to enjoy his favorite food, while the satisfied
man is repelled by the same smell.
Is there anything vicarious in the senses, that is, can one sense be used as a substitute for another? There may be. One can evoke by gestures the usual speech from a deaf person,
granted that he has once been able to hear. In this, the eyes serve [in place of ears]. The same thing may happen through observing the movements of his teacher's lips, indeed by
feeling the movements of the lips of the other person, and this [of course] can occur in darkness [where not sight, but touch, is the substitute for hearing]. If the person is born
deaf, however, the sense of seeing the movements of another's organs of speech must convert the sounds, which his teacher has coaxed from him, into a feeling of the movements
of his own speech muscles. But he will never attain real concepts, since the signs necessary to him are not capable of universality. The deficiency of a musical ear which can
perceive sounds but not tones, or of the person who can speak but not sing, is a handicap hard to explain. There are also people who can see well but who are unable to distinguishcolors, people to whom all objects appear like copper engravings.
Which deficiency or loss of sense is more serious, that of hearing or sight? When it is inborn, deficiency of hearing is the least reparable, but if the deficiency only comes later
after the use of the eyes is cultivated through observation of gestures, or more directly through reading of script, [160] then such a loss can be somewhat compensated for by sight,
especially if the sufferer is well-to-do. An old man who has become deaf misses this means of social communication very much. We see many blind people who are talkative,
companionable, and happy at the table; but it is hard to find someone who has lost his hearing behaving in company other than bored, mistrusting, and dissatisfied. He sees in the
faces of his
47
 48
table-companions all kinds of expressions of affection, or at least of interest; he tires himself out trying in vain to understand their meaning; he is condemned to loneliness in the
midst of others.
§ 23. 111 There is in the last two senses (which are more subjective than objective) a susceptibility to certain objects of external sensations which are merely subjective and
operate upon the organs of smelling and tasting by a stimulus which is neither smell nor taste. The stimulus is felt like the influence of certain stable salts that incite the organs to
specific evacuations. Consequently, these objects are not really enjoyed;112 nor are they absorbed thoroughly by the organs. They only come into contact with the organs and then
they are quickly discarded. They can be used without satiation all day long (except during the time of eating and sleeping). The material most commonly used for this sensation is
tobacco, be it in snuffing, or in placing it in the mouth between the cheek and the gums to stimulate the flow of saliva, or in smoking it through pipes, just as Spanish ladies in
Lima smoke a lighted cigar. Instead of tobacco the Malayans make use of the areca nut rolled up in a betel leaf (betel areca), with the same effect. Apart from any consideration
of medical benefit or injury, which may result from the secretion of fluid in the organs of both senses, this craving (pica) is, as a mere excitation of the sense-feeling, an oftrepeated stimulus recollecting attention to one's own state of mind, which would otherwise lull to sleep or become boring through sameness and monotony. Instead, those means of
stimulation [161] always intensify the feeling of the senses as the doses are administered. This kind of familiarity of a man with himself takes the place of fellowship, because in
place of conversation it fills an emptiness of time not with conversation but with continuous newly excited and quickly vanishing sensations that have to be renewed as stimuli
time and again.
48
 49
On the Inner Sense 113
§ 24.114 The inner sense is not pure apperception, a consciousness of what man does, since that belongs to the faculty of thinking. The inner sense is rather a consciousness of
what man experiences, as far as he is affected by his own play of thought. It is subject to inner perception, and consequently based on the relation between ideas within time
(whether they are simultaneous or successive). The perceptions of the inner sense and the inner experience (veridical or apparent) resulting from the combination of the perceptions
cannot be considered as merely anthropological. If they were, it would be a matter of learning whether or not man has a soul (as a special incorporeal substance). Rather, the
perceptions of the inner sense are psychological, whereby we believe that we perceive such a sense within ourselves. The mind, which is represented as a mere faculty of feeling
and thinking, is regarded as a substance especially resident in man. There is but one inner sense then, because we do not have various organs of inner sensation, and because we
might say that the soul is the organ of the inner sense of which it is said that it is subject to delusions which consist in one's taking internal phenomena either for external
phenomena, that is, taking imagination for sensation, or even for inspiration115 prompted by another Being, which is not an object of external sense. Illusion is then fanaticism or
visionariness, and both are deceptions of the inner sense. In both instances there is mental illness, which lies in the inclination to accept the play of ideas of the inner sense as
empirical knowledge, although it is only fiction,116 or to deceive ourselves by intuitions which are formed in accordance with such fictions (day dreaming). Such a way of
thinking often deludes itself with a pretended frame of mind, possibly because it is thought to be wholesome and superior to the lowliness of sense ideas. Accordingly, that which
man has
49
 50
purposely introduced into his mind he considers as something that must previously have [162] been there, and he believes that he has only uncovered something in the depths of
his soul, which in reality he has forced upon himself.
This is the way it has been with the fanatical and inflammatory inner sensations of Bourignon 117 or with the fanatical and frightening ones of Pascal.118 This ill humor of the
mind cannot be conveniently removed by rational ideas (for indeed, what can they do against supposed intuitions?). The inclination to retire into oneself, together with the
consequent delusions of the inner sense, can only be brought into order if man is returned to the external world, into the order of the things which present themselves to externalsenses.
On the Causes of Increasing or Decreasing Sensory Perceptions According to Degree119
§ 25.120 Senses are increased in degree by means of 1) contrast, 2) novelty, 3) change, 4) intensification.121
A. Contrast
Contrast [Abstechung] is the juxtaposition, commanding our attention, of mutually opposite sense ideas under one and the same concept. It is distinguished from contradiction
which consists in the uniting of mutually clashing notions. A well-cultivated piece of land in a sandy desert sets off the idea of the cultivation by mere contrast, like the so-called
paradisaical region in the area of Damascus in Syria. The tranquil, simple, and contented life of a man in the country, a house with a thatched roof, where you find taste and
comfort within,
50
 51
heightens the perception and we gladly dwell on it because the senses are thereby strengthened, especially if it is contrasted with the din and the glamour of a court, or even of a
large city. On the other hand, there is poverty and pride, the splendid adornment of a lady glittering with diamonds, though her linen is soiled; or, as once with a Polish magnate,
extravagantly laden tables along with countless waiters in crude footwear. These things do not stand in contrast, but in contradiction [163] in which one sense idea weakens the
other because it tries to unite opposites in one and the same concept, which is impossible. One can also make a comical contrast and portray an apparent contradiction in the tone
of truth, 122 or something seemingly contemptible can be portrayed in the language of praise in order to make the absurdity more apparent, as Fielding123 parodies great men in
Jonathan Wild, or as Blumauer124 in his travesty parodies Virgil. Also, for example, a writer parodies a heartrending novel like Clarissa125 lightly and with profit, and thus
strengthens the senses by freeing them from the conflict which false and harmful concepts have instilled into them.
B. Novelty
Through the new, to which also belongs the rare and the hidden, attention is enlivened. What is new stands for an acquisition whereby the sense ideas acquire more power. The
everyday routine or the habitual extinguishes the sense idea's strength. However, this does not apply to the discovery, the contact with, or the public exhibition of a work of
antiquity, whereby something is rediscovered which was expected to have been destroyed by the force of time during the natural run of things. The senses of the expert are
heightened to their utmost attention when he is able to sit upon a piece of masonry of an old Roman theatre (in Verona or Nîmes), or to hold in his hands a piece of household
goods of that nation,
51
 52
brought to light many centuries later from the lava of old Herculaneum, or when he can show a coin dating from the time of the Macedonian kings, or a cameo of an ancient
sculpture, and so forth. The inclination to acquire knowledge merely because of its novelty, rarity, and inaccessibility is called curiosity. This inclination, despite the fact that it
only plays with ideas and is otherwise without interest in their object, is not to be criticized except when it engages in spying on what really is of interest to others alone. As to the
bare sense impression each morning, through the mere novelty of the sensations it brings, makes all ideas of the senses (as long as they are not diseased in any way) clearer and
livelier than they generally are toward evening.
[164] C. Change
Monotony (complete uniformity of sensations) ultimately leads to atony of sensations (lack of attention to one's condition), so that sense perception is weakened. Variation
freshens sensation just as a sermon read in the same tone, whether it be shouted out or delivered with measured yet uniform voice, puts the whole congregation to sleep. Labor and
rest, city and country life, social discourse and mere play, entertainment in solitude, now with prose, now with poetry, sometimes with philosophy, and sometimes with
mathematics, all these changes of activity strengthen the mind. The same power of vitality is at work here that arouses the awareness of sensation; but the various organs of the
power of vitality relieve each other in their activity. Thus it is easier to bear one's weight a limited time in walking, where first one muscle (of the leg) and then another is at rest,
than it is to remain standing rigid in the same place where one muscle must work without relief. Therefore travel is so alluring; it is only regrettable that for idle people it leaves
behind a void (atony) as the consequence of the monotony of their domestic life.
52
 53Nature has so ordered it that even grief creeps in unbidden between pleasant and sensuously agreeable sensations, and thus makes life interesting. But to mix in grief intentionally,
for the sake of variation, is absurd, just as it is absurd to hurt oneself, or to have oneself awakened, just to enjoy falling asleep again. Another example of this is Fielding's novel
(The Foundling) to which an editor, after the author's death, for the sake of variety appended a final part, a wedding (which concludes the story), in order to introduce the element
of jealousy. Making a situation worse does not add to the interest which the senses take in it, not even in a tragedy. The end is not open to variation. 126
D. The Increase of Quality Toward Perfection
A continuous sequence of purposively arranged127 successive sense ideas, which are different in degree, has, if each of the following ideas is stronger than its predecessor, the
attribute of [165] extreme tension (intensio); to approach this extreme is inspiring, while transgressing it is exhausting (remissio). However, at a point between the two conditions
lies the perfection (maximum) of the sensation, which is followed by insensibility and, consequently, lifelessness.
If you want to keep your faculty of the senses alive, you must not begin with strong sensations (because they make us insensitive to subsequent sensations), but rather deny them
to yourself and restrain yourself at the very beginning in order to be able gradually to escalate later. The orator in the pulpit begins by way of introduction with a cold instruction
of the understanding, which points to the consideration of the concept of duty; then he introduces a moral interest into the interpretation of his text; and then he concludes in the
application with an appeal to all motives of the human soul through the sensations which can give emphasis to that particular interest.
53
 54
Young man! Deny yourself satisfaction 128 (of amusement, of debauchery, of love, etc.), not with the Stoical intention of complete abstinence, but with the refined Epicurean
intention of having in view an ever-growing pleasure. This stinginess with the cash of your vital urge makes you definitely richer through the postponement of pleasure, even if
you should, for the most part, renounce the indulgence of it until the end of your life. The awareness of having pleasure under your control is, like everything idealistic, more
fruitful and more abundant than everything that satisfies the sense through indulgence because it is thereby simultaneously consumed and consequently lost from the aggregate of
totality.
On the Decreasing, Weakening, and Entire Loss of the Faculty of the Senses
§ 26.129 The faculty of the senses may be either weakened, decreased, or entirely lost. We have such corresponding conditions as drunkenness, sleep, unconsciousness, apparent
death (asphyxia), and actual death.
Drunkenness is the unnatural condition of inability to order one's sense ideas according to the laws of experience, as long as the condition is the effect of excessive indulgence in
drink.130
By verbal definition, sleep is a condition in which [166] a healthy person is unable to be aware of ideas through external senses. However, to find an explanation of this remains
for the physiologists who, if they are able, may explain this exhaustion, which is also a gathering of strength for renewed external sense perception (whereby man considers
himself as newborn in the world, and whereby probably a third of our life-span passes unaware and unregretted).131
54
 55
The unnatural condition of numbed sense organs, resulting in a lesser degree of self-awareness than would normally be the case, is an analogue of drunkenness; therefore you
might say that one suddenly aroused from sleep is drunk with sleep, because he does not have full control over his awareness. But even when awake, a cessation of the play of
sense perceptions can occur when a sudden attack of embarrassment, while trying to decide what to do in an unforeseen situation, results in the stopping of the orderly and
ordinary use of one's reflective faculty. In such a case we say, he has lost his composure; he is beside himself (with joy or terror); he is perplexed, nonplussed, and puzzled; he has
lost his Tramontano, 132* and so forth, this condition is to be considered as a sudden falling asleep for the collecting of one's sense impressions. Suddenly affected by strong
emotions (of terror, anger, and, indeed, joy) man is, so to speak, beside himself (in an ecstasy when he believes that he is seized by an intuition which is not of the senses), and he
has no power over himself; and he is momentarily paralyzed in the use of external senses.
§ 27.133 Unconsciousness which usually follows dizziness (a quickly revolving change of many dissimilar sensations beyond comprehension) is a foretaste of death.134 The
complete suspension of all sensation is called asphyxia, or apparent death, which, as far as we can judge externally, may be distinguished from actual death (as in persons
drowned, hanged, or suffocated) by its potential return to life.
Nobody can experience his own death (since it requires life [167] in order to experience); he can only observe it in others. Whether death is painful cannot be judged from the
rattling in the throat or the convulsions of the dying person, this seems rather to be a mere
* Tramontano, or Tramontana, is the name of the North Star; and perdere la tramontana means losing the North Star (as the sailor's guiding star), and figuratively losingone's bearings, being at a loss.
55
 56
mechanical reaction of the vital power, and perhaps it is a gentle sensation of the gradual release from all suffering. The natural fear of death, entertained even by the most
unhappy, or the most wise, is therefore not a fear of dying, but rather, as Montaigne 135 rightly puts it, a fear of having died (that is, of being dead). This is a thought the victim of
death expects to entertain after dying, because he thinks of his corpse as himself, though it no longer is, and he thinks of it as lying in a dismal grave, or somewhere else. This
deception cannot be removed because it is inherent in the nature of thinking as a way of speaking to oneself and of oneself. The thought, I am not, cannot exist at all; because if I
am not, then it cannot occur to me that I am not.136 I may indeed say that I am not well, and so forth, and negate similar predicates of myself (as happens with all verba); but to
negate the subject itself when speaking in the first person (thereby destroying itself) is a contradiction.
On Imagination137
§ 28.138 The imagination (facultas imaginandi), as a faculty of perception without the presence of the object, is either productive, that is, a faculty of the original representation of
the object (exhibitio originaria), which consequently precedes experience, or it is reproductive, that is, a faculty of the derived representation (exhibitio derivativa), which recalls
to mind a previous empirical perception. Pure perception of Space and Time belongs to the productive faculty; all the others presuppose empirical perception which, if it is linked
with the concept of the object, thus becoming empirical cognition, is called experience. Imagination, as far as it involuntarily produces images, is called fantasy. He who is
accustomed to consider these images as (inner or outer) experiences, is a visionary. To become the victim of the involuntary play of one's imagination during sleep (a healthy
state) is called dreaming.
Imagination is, in other words, either poetical (pro56
 57
ductive), or merely recollective (reproductive). The productive faculty [168], however, is nevertheless not creative, because it does not have the power to produce a sense
impression which has never before occurred to our senses. One can always identify the material which gave rise to that impression. To one who has never seen red among the
seven colors, we can never explain the sensation of the color red. To one who is born blind, we cannot make any colors intelligible, least of all a secondary color such as green,
which is derived by mixing two primary colors, yellow and blue. The imagination, however, would not have the slightest idea of this color unless one had seen both colors mixed.
This holds true for each one of the five senses; that is, the sensations produced by the five senses in their synthesis cannot be made through the faculty of imagination, but must be
drawn originally from the faculty of the senses. There have been people who could no more than distinguish between black and white; and for them, although they could see well,
the visible world must have appeared to be engraved on copperplate. And there are more people than one would suppose who have a good, if not extremely sensitive, sense of
hearing, though, unfortunately, they do not have a musical ear. Their sense of tone does not permit them to imitate sounds (to sing), nor does it distinguish mere noise from sound.
The same may apply to the sensations of smell and of taste; they, too, may be lacking the sensitivity for many a pleasurable sensation offered by objects; and we may believe that
we understand each other while our sensations may differ from those of others, not only in degree, but, radically, also in kind. There are people who lack the sense of smell
entirely; they regard the sensation of drawing pure air through the nose as the sensation of smell, and consequently they cannot understand any explanation which tries to describe
the sensation of smell to them. But where the sense of smell is lacking, there is also a lack of taste. It is futile to explain and describe taste to someone
57
 58
who does not have this sense. But hunger and its satisfaction (satiation) 139 is something quite different from taste.
Therefore, however great an artist the imagination may be, even if it be a sorceress, it still is not creative, but must gather the material for its images from the senses. But as stated
above [169], the images are not so universally communicable as the concepts of the understanding. We sometimes speak (though only figuratively) of the sensitivity of perception
of the imagination as a sense. We say the person has no sense for something; though in not grasping communicated ideas and combining them in thought there is an inability not
of sense, but partly of the understanding. He himself speaks without thinking, and therefore others do not understand him; he speaks no sense (non-sense).140 This is a deficiency
that must be distinguished from what is devoid of sense, where thoughts are paired in such a way that another person does not know what to make of it.
The fact that the word ''sense" (but only in the singular) is used so often as a synonym for "thought" should indicate that it is of a higher level than that of thinking. Consequently,
we have expressions which say that something contains a rich or profound sense (hence the word maxim),141 and sound human understanding is also called common sense, and is
placed on the highest level, although this expression really denotes only the lowest level of the cognitive faculty. All this is based upon the fact that the imagination, whichsupplies the content of understanding, that is, content to its concepts for the sake of knowledge, seems to give a reality to its invented notions because of the analogy between
them and real perceptions.
§ 29.142 Intoxicating food or drink are material means to excite or soothe143 the imagination.* Some of the food and drink [170] weaken, as
* I do not concern myself here with what is not instrumental to a purpose, but which is rather a natural consequence of a condition into which
(footnote continued on the next page)
58
 59
poisons, one's vitality (certain mushrooms, wild rosemary, acanthus, Peruvian chicha, South Sea Islanders' ava, and opium); others strengthen the powers of vitality, or at least
arouse them (like fermented beverages, wine and beer, or distilled beverages like brandy); but all of them are unnatural and artificial. He who indulges in them in such excess that
he is for a time unable to arrange his sense perceptions according to the laws of experience, 144 is said to be drunk or intoxicated,145 and getting oneself into such a condition
voluntarily or intentionally is described as getting drunk. All these methods, however, are meant to serve the purpose of making man forget the burden which seems to be an
integral part of life itself. Such a widespread inclination and its influence on the use of the understanding deserve special consideration in a pragmatic anthropology.
All stultifying drunkenness, such as comes from opium or brandy, that is, drunkenness which does not encourage sociability or the exchange of thought, has something shameful
about it. Wine and beer provide intoxication for social purposes; wine has simply a stimulating effect, while beer is more nourishing and satisfying like food. There is, however, a
characteristic difference. The beer-drinking bout is associated with taciturn fantasies, and frequently with impolite behavior,
(footnote continued from the previous page)
someone has been placed and whereby his imagination alone disconcerts him. Such instances are dizziness caused by looking down from the edge of something high
(possibly also by looking from a narrow bridge without a railing), or seasickness. The board on which a timid man steps would, if it were resting on the ground, cause no
fear; however, if it is placed across a deep precipice as a bridge, then the thought of the mere possibility of tripping is so powerful that the person attempting to cross over
is really in danger. Seasickness (which I myself experienced on a trip from Pillau to Königsberg, if it is permissible to refer to it as a sea voyage), affected me with nausea
and, as I think I have observed, was brought about merely by my eyes, because the rolling of the ship, as seen from the cabin, allowed me to see sometimes the bay, and
sometimes the heights of Balga, so that the recurrent falling after the rising of the ship provoked, by means of the imagination, an antiperistaltic movement in the muscles
of my stomach.
59
 60
whereas a wine-party is merry, boisterous, and teeming with wit.
Excessive 146 social drinking that leads to the befogging of the senses is by no means becoming to a man, not only with respect to the company with whom he enjoys himself, but
also from the standpoint of self-esteem, particularly when a man leaves the company staggering, or at least with an unsure step, or merely babbling. But much can be said for
tempering our judgment at such an indiscretion, since the border line of self-control can be so easily overlooked and overstepped. It must be remembered that the host desires that
the guest depart from the house entirely satisfied (ut conviva satur)147 with his hospitality.
Freedom from care, along with heedlessness caused by intoxication, is a deceptive feeling or increased vitality. In such a state the intoxicated man is not aware of the obstacles of
life, even though his nature requires him to overcome them constantly (in which also exists his well-being), and he is happy in his weakness148 in view of the fact that Nature is
actually working in him to renew his conscious life [171] by gradually rebuilding his strength. Women, clergymen, and Jews149 ordinarily do not become drunk, at least they
carefully avoid all appearance of it, because they are weak in civic life and must restrain themselves (for which sobriety is required). Their external value depends simply on other
people's belief in their chastity, piety, and their separatistic character.150 Because, as far as the Jews are concerned, all separatists, that is, such as submit not only to a general law
of the state, but also to a particular law (of their own sect), are, as foreign elements and as pretended elected ones, particularly exposed to the attention of the community and to
harsh criticism. Hence they cannot relax their self-attention because intoxication, which removes heedfulness, is to them scandalous.
A Stoic admirer of Cato said: "his virtue was strengthened by wine" (virtus eius incaluit mero);151 and a
60
 61modern German says about the Teutons: "They formed their councils (to wage war) at a drinking-bout, so that the decisions would be passionate; and, when they were sober, they
reconsidered their decisions, so that they might not be wanting in intelligence." 152
Drink loosens the tongue (in vino disertus).153 But it also opens the heart wide, and it is a vehicle instrumental to a moral quality, that is, openheartedness. Restraining one's
thoughts154 is an oppressive state for a sincere person, and merry drinkers do not readily tolerate an overly reserved drinker because he is an observer who notices the faults of
others while he keeps his own under control. Also Hume says: "I hate a drinking companion who never forgets. The follies of the last debauch must be buried in eternal oblivion,
in order to give full scope to the follies of the next."155 Good-naturedness is presupposed when this license is granted to a man to cross the boundary line of sobriety for a short
time, for the sake of sociability. Half a century ago a fraudulent policy was used by the Nordic courts when they sent delegates who could drink much without getting drunk
themselves; they made others drunk in order to extract information from them or to persuade them. This practice, however, has disappeared along with the crudity of the customs
of those times; to issue a warning against this corruption would be superfluous in view of the morally improved conditions of the present day.
There is also a question whether the temperament or the character of a person can be investigated when the person gets drunk. I do not think so. [172] A new fluid has been mixed
with the fluid which flows in his veins; the nerves are stimulated in a different manner so that the natural temperature is no longer clearly revealed, but is replaced by another.
Consequently, one person who gets drunk is amorous, another becomes vainglorious, a third becomes quarrelsome, a fourth (especially when drinking beer) is tenderhearted, or
sanctimonious, or silent altogether. But when they have all slept off their
61
 62
stupor, and when they have been reminded of their talk during the past evening, they all laugh at the strange or ill humor of their senses.
§ 30. 156 Originality (nonimitative production) of the imagination is called genius when it harmonizes with notions. If originality does not harmonize with notions, then it is called
fanaticism. It is noteworthy that we cannot imagine another suitable form for a rational being than the form of man. Every other form would represent only a symbol of a certain
human quality, for example, the serpent as the image of malicious cunning, but it would not represent the rational being itself. Therefore our imagination populates all other
planets with nothing but human forms although it is probable that they may be formed very differently because of the diversity of soil which supports and nourishes them and
because of the variety of the elements of which they are composed. All other forms which we might give them are caricatures.*
When the lack of a sense (for example, sight) is inborn, then the handicapped person will try to compensate for the missing sense with another sense, and the productive faculty of
the imagination will be used to a high degree. He will try to explore the forms of external bodies through the sense of touch, and, where this sense does not suffice on account of
magnitude (for example, of a house), he tries to grasp the spaciousness through still another sense, possibly through hearing, that is, through the echo of a voice in the room. If
finally, however, a successful operation allows the organ [173] to
* Therefore the Trinity, an old man, a young man, and a bird (the dove), must be understood not as actual forms which resemble their objects, but rather as mere symbols.
Pictorial expressions of the descent from heaven and the ascension to heaven are just such symbolic expressions. We cannot proceed in any other way; we have to
anthropomorphize if we want to provide our notions of rational being with illustration. It is, however, unfortunate and childish if, as a consequence, the symbolic
representation becomes the notion for the object as such.
62
 63
receive a sensation, then he must first of all learn to see and hear, that is, he has to associate his notions with the perceptions received from the objects.
Concepts of objects often induce us to give them a form of our own making (created by the productive faculty of imagination). When one reads or hears of the life and deeds of a
man who is great by virtue of his talent, merit, or rank, then one is generally misled in ascribing considerable stature to him in the imagination, whereas one ascribes a paltry,
flexible stature to someone who is described as having a sensitive and gentle character. Not only the peasant, but also someone fairly well acquainted with the ways of the world,
feels strange when the hero, whose appearance had been judged by the deeds sung of him, presents himself as a little fellow, and when the sensitive and gentle Hume presents
himself as a square-built fellow. Therefore we must not raise our hopes too high in anticipation of anything, because the imagination naturally inclines toward the highest
expectation, for actuality is always more limited than the idea that serves as a pattern for realization.
It is not advisable to praise a person too highly in advance when we wish to introduce him to others for the first time; it might rather be a malicious trick on the part of a rogue to
make a person seem ridiculous. The imagination raises the idea of what is anticipated so high that the victim can only suffer. This is just what happens when a book, a drama, or
anything else belonging to the gracious life is announced with exaggerated praise; when we do come to know it, it can only be disappointing to us. Merely having read a good
drama weakens the impression when we see it enacted. But if what was praised in advance turns out to be just the opposite of what we were led to anticipate, then the object
portrayed, provided it is otherwise innocuous, arouses the greatest laughter. 157Variable forms, which of themselves really have no meaning that might excite attention, when set in motion, like the flickering of an open fire or the twisting and
63
 64
babbling of a brook flowing over stones, fill the imagination with a host of ideas of an entirely [174] different sort (from that of sight), namely, to play in the mind and to be
absorbed in meditation. Even music, for one who does not listen as a connoisseur, can throw a poet or a philosopher into a mood in which, depending on his vocation or
avocation, he can capture thoughts as well as master them; yet if he were sitting alone in his room, he would not be able to grasp them so readily. The reason for this phenomenon
seems to be the following: when, through a manifold that of itself can excite no attention, the sense is distracted by some other object that strikes it more forcibly, thinking is not
only facilitated but also enlivened in so far as it needs a more concentrated and enduring faculty of imagination to give substance to its the ideas. The English Spectator 158
reports tale of a barrister who, when pleading, was in the habit of taking a thread from his pocket which he incessantly twisted and unwound on his finger. Then one day, when his
opponent, a rogue, secretly removed the thread from his pocket, the barrister was completely at a loss and spoke nothing but nonsense. Therefore one says, "He has lost the thread
of his discourse."159 The sense which is concentrated on one sensation (because of acquired habit) does not react to other sensations, and therefore is not diverted; but the faculty
of imagination in this way may be better maintained in its regular course.
On the Sensory Productive Faculty with All Its Branches
§ 31.160 There are three distinct varieties of the sensory productive faculty. These are the pictorial perception in space (imaginatio plastica), the associative perception in time
(imaginatio associans), and the sensory productive faculty of affinity based on the shared lineage of ideas from each other (affinitas).161
64
 65
A. On the Pictorial Sensory Productive Faculty
Before the artist can depict a corporeal form (palpably, so to speak), he must have prepared it in his imagination. This [175] form is an invention which, when involuntary (as
perhaps in a dream), is called fantasy and is not to be associated with the artist; but if it is voluntary, it is called composition or discovery. If the artist bases his work on images
resembling objects of nature, his productions are called natural. 162 But if he bases his work on images which cannot have any existence in experience, then the created products
(like the palace of the Prince Palagonia in Sicily)163 are called fantastic, unnatural, or caricatures. Such flashes of imagination are like164 daydreams (velut aegri somnia vanae
finguntur species).165 We play with the imagination frequently and gladly, but (as fantasy) the imagination just as often plays with us, sometimes very inconveniently.
The play of fantasy in a sleeping person is called a dream, which occurs even in a healthy condition. On the other hand, dreaming betrays a morbid state when it happens during
waking hours. Sleep, as detachment from every faculty of external perception and, especially, from voluntary motions, seems to be required by all animals, and even by plants (by
the analogy of plants to animals) for the recovery of forces spent during waking hours. But the same thing seems also to be the case with dreaming: the vitality would be
extinguished if it were not always kept active in sleep by means of dreams, and the deepest sleep would bring death along with it. When we say that we have had a good sleep
without dreaming, we are indeed saying nothing more than that we remember no dreams upon awakening. In view of the rapid changes of the imagination, this could happen just
as well in waking hours when we are gazing steadily at a fixed point in a state of distraction. If the person is asked what he is thinking at this moment, the reply will be: "I have
been
65
 66
thinking nothing at all." If upon awakening there were not many gaps in our memory (caused by inattention to interconnecting perceptions), and if the next night we would begin
to dream just where we had left off the night before, then I do not know whether we would not imagine that we were living in two different worlds. Dreaming is a wise provision
of Nature for exciting vitality through emotions which have been caused by involuntarily invented events, while muscular movements, depending on volition, are in the meantime
suspended. [176] But we must not take the content of dreams to be revelations from an invisible world.
B. On the Associative Sensory Productive Faculty
The law of association is that empirical perceptions, which frequently follow one another, create an acquired habit in the mind, so that when one perception is engendered, the
associated one also arises. 166 It is futile to demand167 a physiological explanation of this phenomenon. We may use whatever168 serves as an hypothesis (which itself is again a
fabrication), like Descartes' hypothesis of his so-called material ideas of the mind.169 At least any such explanation would not be pragmatic, that is, we cannot use it for any
technical purpose, for we have no knowledge of the brain, nor of the sections of the brain in which the traces of impressions derived from perceptions might harmonize
sympathetically with each other, so far as the parts are in at least indirect contact.This association often extends very far, and the imagination frequently runs from hundreds into thousands so rapidly that it seems we have completely skipped certain links in the
chain of perceptions, although we are merely not conscious of them.170 Consequently, more often than not, we must ask ourselves: "Where am I? From what point did I begin my
conversation? How did I arrive at this conclusion?"*
66
 67
C. On the Sensory Productive Faculty of Affinity
By affinity I understand the union established by the derivation of the manifold from a single foundation. What interrupts and destroys social [177] conversation is the jumping
from a given subject to one of a quite different sort. In this case the empirical association of perceptions is only subjective; that is, one person associates perceptions differently
from another, and such association is misleading and, with respect to form, a kind of nonsense. Only when a subject has been exhausted and there is a short pause, can one
introduce another subject of interest. Irregular, roaming imagination confuses the mind through the changing reference to different perceptions that are linked to nothing objective,
so that he who departs from a company of this sort feels as though he has been dreaming. There must always be a theme according to which the manifold is ordered, not only
with silent thinking, but with the sharing of thoughts; and, consequently, the understanding must also be at work at the same time. Nevertheless, here the play of the imagination
follows the rules of sensibility, which provides the material whose association is achieved without consciousness of the rule, consonant with the understanding but not derived
from it.
The word affinity (affinitas) here reminds one of a catalytic interaction found in chemistry, an interaction analogous to an intellectual combination, which links two elements
specifically distinct from each other, but inti-
* He who enters upon a social discourse must, therefore, begin with what is present and near at hand, and thus gradually lead to what is more remote as long as it can be
of any interest. Thus, a good and common subject is the bad weather for a person who walks from the street into a group assembled for mutual conversation. If, upon
entering a room, one begins to speak of the latest news from Turkey currently appearing in the papers, then the imagination of others would be struck too forcibly, since
they would not understand what has led him to speak of it. The mind demands a certain order in the communication of thoughts, and much depends on the general
circumstances and the opening statement, not only in conversation, but also in a sermon.
67
 68
mately affecting each other and striving for unity with each other, whereby the combination creates a third entity that has properties which can only be brought about by the union
of two heterogeneous elements.
Despite their dissimilarity, understanding and sensibility by themselves form a close union for bringing about our cognition, as though one were begotten by the other, or as
though both had a common origin, which is impossible; at least we cannot conceive how things so dissimilar could have sprung from one and the same source.*
§ 32. 171 [178] The imagination is not so creative as one would like to believe. We cannot think of any other form that would be suitable for a rational being than the form of a
human being. For this reason the sculptor or painter always depicts a man when he represents an angel or a god. Every other figure seems to have members which, according to
his idea, do not befit the structure of a rational being (like wings, talons, hooves). On the other hand, he can make things as large as he wishes.
Deception caused by the strength of the human imagination often goes so far that one believes he sees and feels, as outside himself, something that exists only in his head.
Therefore, the person who looks into an abyss is overcome by dizziness even though he has a broad surface around him to prevent his falling, or perhaps even leans against a
strong railing. Strange is the fear of certain mentally sick people that they will have an
* The first two kinds of composition of perceptions could be called mathematical (of enlargement), but the third would be called dynamic (of production), whereby an
entirely new entity arises (somewhat like a chemical compound). The play of powers in inanimate Nature, as well as in the animate, in the soul as well as in the body, is
based on separating and uniting the dissimilar. We reach cognition of the play of powers by experiencing the effects; the ultimate cause and the most basic ingredients into
which their substance can be analyzed, cannot be found by us. What is the reason for the fact that all known organic beings are propagated through the union of the
(footnote continued on the next page)
68
 69inner impulse willfully to cast themselves down from a high place. The sight of others enjoying loathsome things (for example, when the Tunguses suck out and gulp down the
mucus from their children's noses) causes the witness to vomit, just as if such a pleasure were forced on him.
The homesickness of the Swiss (and, as I have it from the lips of an experienced general, also of the Westphalians and the Pomeranians from certain areas), which befalls them
when they are transferred to other lands, is the result of a longing that is aroused by the recollection of a carefree life and neighborly company in their youth, a longing for the
places where they enjoyed the very simple pleasures of life. Later, when they visit these places, they they find their anticipation dampened and even their homesickness [179]
cured. They think that everything has drastically changed, but it is that they cannot bring back their youth. It is remarkable that such homesickness befalls peasants of a penniless
province, where there are strong family ties, and it strikes them more deeply than it does those who are busy earning money and who take for their motto: Patria ubi bene. 172
If we have heard that this or that person is a bad man, we believe we can read malice in his face. Here invention mingles with the experience of a single sensation, especially when
emotion and passion are added. According to Helvétius,173 a lady looked through a telescope and saw in the moon the shadows of two lovers; the clergyman, who subsequently
made the observation, said: ''Not exactly, Madam; they are two belfries of a cathedral."
One can add to all this the sympathetic workings of
(footnote continued from the previous page)
two sexes (which we call male and female)? We cannot very well assume that the Creator was merely amusing himself out of eccentricity and just making on this earthglobe [MS, Cassirer: globeEd.] an arrangement that pleased him. Rather, it seems impossible that organic creatures can originate from the matter of this earth in any other
way than through the existence of the two sexes established for this purpose. In what obscurity does the human reason lose itself when it seeks to establish the reason for
our lineage, or when it only tries to make a guess at it?
69
 70
the imagination. The sight of a person in a convulsive or epileptic attack incites us to similar convulsive movements. The same is true when someone yawns, and we are induced
to yawn with him. The physician Michaelis 174 reports the case of a soldier in the army in North America, who fell into a violent delirium, and two or three bystanders were
suddenly thrown into the same frenzy upon seeing him, although it was just a passing attack. It is not advisable, therefore, for neurotic people (hypochondriacs) to visit madhouses
just for the sake of curiosity. For the most part, they shun them of their own accord because they fear for their saneness. We also find that when someone explains something
emotional to vivacious people, especially something that may have occurred to him175 causing anger, their attention is so aroused that they make faces and involuntarily engage in
a play of features appropriate to the emotion. We might also have noticed that on occasion married people gradually acquire176 similarity of features, and it is explained that this
is due to the fact that they were married on account of the similarity (similis simili gaudet).177 But this is false. For Nature instead strives by the instinct of the sexes for the
diversity of the subjects so that they fall in love with each other and develop all the variety which Nature has implanted in them. Instead, it is the intimacy and the inclination with
which they often look into each other's eyes when they are close to each other in solitary conversations that produces sympathetic [180] and similar countenances which, upon
becoming fixed, finally pass into permanent features.
Finally, the inclination to tell harmless lies can be referred to the unintentional play of the productive imagination, something which may be called fantasy. This inclination is
invariably to be met with in children, now and then in adults who are otherwise well-disposed, and at times it is almost a hereditary disease. Events and pretended adventures, that
are narrated, issue from the imagination like a descending avalanche of snow, al70
 71
though the person telling the tale has nothing to gain except to be interesting. Such a case is Shakespeare's Sir John Falstaff 178 who made two buckram-clad men into five men
before he had completed his tale.
§ 33.179 Imagination is richer and more fertile with ideas than sense is, and the imagination becomes, if coupled with passion, more lively when the object is absent than when it is
present. This is evident when something happens which calls the idea of an object to mind which for a time seemed to be extinguished by distracting influences. Once a German
prince,180 a rugged warrior, though a nobleman, took a journey to Italy to banish from his mind his love for a peasant girl on his estate. But, upon his return, the first glimpse of
her dwelling awakened his imagination so much more intensely than continuous association would have done that he yielded to his resolution without further delay, which,
fortunately, was what was expected. This malady, the result of an inventive imagination, is incurable except through marriage, which reflects truth (eripitur persona, manet
resLucretius).181
The inventive imagination causes a kind of association with ourselves, which, though it may be merely phenomena of the inner sense, is nevertheless analogous to the outer sense.
The night enlivens it and raises it above its real values, just as the moon in the evening cuts a great figure in the heavens, though on a bright day it merely looks like aninsignificant little cloud. Imagination flourishes in one who works intellectually in the stillness of the night, or who quarrels with an imaginary opponent, or builds castles in the
air as he walks about his chamber. But everything that then seemed important loses its significance in the morning after a night's sleep. Yet in the course of time this bad habit
[181] causes a weakening of mental powers. Therefore, the taming of one's imagination, by going to sleep early in order to rise early, is a very useful rule for the psychological
diet.
71
 72
Certain females, however, and hypochondriacs (who commonly have their ailment for just this reason) prefer the opposite type of conduct. Why are ghost stories, which are
welcomed late at night, distasteful to us and not appropriate for conversation as soon as we arise in the morning? At that time we ask instead: "What has been happening in the
house and in the world?" or else we continue our work of the preceding day. The reason for this is that what is in itself nothing but play is suitable for the relaxation of powers
expended during the day, but what is business is suitable for a man strengthened as well as reborn, as it were, through a good night's rest.
The faults (vitia) of the imagination are that its inventions are either unbridled or unruly (effrenis aut perversa). The unruly invention is the worst kind. Unbridled inventions can
find their place in a possible world (that of fable), but unruly inventions cannot find their place in any world because they are self-contradictory. A fault of the first type, that is, of
unbridled imagination, is illustrated by the Arabs who look with horror at the hewn forms of men and animals frequently encountered in the Libyan Desert, Ras-Sem. 182 They
consider them to be real men turned into stone by a curse. It is, however, a contradiction when the same Arabs say that these statues of animals, on the day of the general
resurrection, will snarl at the sculptor with the reproach that, though he made them, he was unable to give them souls. Unbridled fantasy can still be checked (like the fantasy of
that poet183 who was asked by Cardinal Este on the occasion of the presentation of a book dedicated to him, "Maestro Ariosto, where the devil did you get all this rubbish?").
Unbridled fantasy has an embarrassment of riches, but unruly fantasy approaches madness where it has won control over the man so that the unfortunate fellow cannot regulate the
course of his ideas.
Furthermore, a political artist, just as well as an aesthetic artist, can guide and rule the world (mundus vult decipi)184 by imagination if he knows how to make a false
72
 73
show of reality, for example, of freedom of a people (like that in the English Parliament), or of rank and equality (as in the French Convention), which consist in mere formalities.
[182] Nevertheless, it is better to have for yourself only the appearance of possessing this gift that ennobles humanity than to feel yourself simply bereft of it.
Of the Faculty of Visualizing the Past and the Future by Means of the Imagination
§ 34. 185 The faculty of visualizing the past intentionally is the faculty of memory; and the faculty of visualizing something as future is the faculty of foreseeing. So far as they are
sensible, both are based upon the association of ideas of the past and future condition of the subject with the present; and although they are not themselves perceptions, yet as a
linking-together of perceptions in time, they serve to connect in a coherent experience what is no more with what does not yet exist, by means of what is present. They are called
the faculty of memory and the faculty of divination, of respicience and prospicience (if the use of such terms may be allowed), where one is conscious of one's ideas as those
which could be encountered in past or future situations.
A. Of Memory
Memory differs from the merely reproductive imagination in that it is able to reproduce the former ideas voluntarily, for the mind is not a mere play of imagination. Fantasy, that
is, the creative imagination, must not be interwoven with it, because then the memory would be unreliable. To grasp something in memory, to reflect on it easily, and to retain it
for long, these constitute the
73
 74
formal perfections of memory. But these properties are seldom found together. If someone believes he has something in his memory but cannot bring it into consciousness, he says
he cannot recall it (not to be able to recall means much the same as declaring oneself senseless). The effort to recall, if one should strive to do so, is mentally fatiguing, and one
does well to distract oneself for a while by other thoughts, and then from time to [183] time look back to the object for a moment. Then one ordinarily catches one of the
associated ideas which will bring it back.
To grasp something in the memory methodically (memoriae mandare) is called memorizing (not studying, as the common man says of the preacher who merely learns by heart the
sermon that he intends to deliver). Memorizing may be mechanical, ingenious, or judicious. The first depends simply on frequent and literal repetition, for example, in learning themultiplication table, when learners must go through a whole sequence of numbers following each other in the usual order, for the sake of reaching what is desired. For instance,
when the beginner is asked: "How much are three times seven?" he begins with three times three, and continues until he reaches twenty-one; but if you ask him: "How much are
seven times three?" he will not immediately remember, but must reverse the numbers, so as to place them in the usual order. If what is memorized is a sacred formula in which no
expression is to be altered, but which must be reeled off correctly, then people with even the best memory are afraid to depend on it (in fact this fear itself could make them err).
Therefore, they consider it necessary to read it off, as the most experienced preachers do, because the least alteration of words would be ridiculous.
Ingenious memorizing is a method of imprinting certain ideas on the memory by association with correlative ideas, which of themselves (as far as understanding is concerned)
have no relationship with each other, for example, sounds of a language which are supposed to
74
 75
correspond to images that are wholly dissimilar. In this case, in order to fix something in the memory more easily, we encumber ourselves with still more correlative associations.
Consequently, as a procedure of the unruly imagination, 186 the pairing of two ideas which cannot go together, under one and the same concept, is absurd. At the same time, it is
also a contradiction between the means and the intention, since one tries to ease the burden on the memory, but the means chosen to do so make the burden heavier by
unnecessarily loading it with associations of quite disparate ideas.* The observation that wags seldom have a reliable memory [184] (ingeniosis non admodum fida est
memoria)187 is explained by this phenomenon.
Judicious memorizing is nothing but using a table for the classification of a system of thought (for example, that of Linnaeus)188 wherein, if one should have forgotten anything,
he can duly recover it by enumerating the links which he has retained; or else by remembering the sections of a once visibly arranged whole (for example, the provinces of a
country on a map, which lie to the north, to the west, etc.), for here we need understanding, and understanding is reciprocally helpful to the imagination. Most of all, the judicious
use of the topic, that is, a framework for general concepts, called commonplaces,189 facilitates remembering through class division, as when we distribute books on properly
labeled shelves.
There is no mnemonic art (ars mnemonica) for general learning. Among the special tricks of this kind are
* The picture book, like the pictorial Bible, or indeed one of the illustrated compendiums of law, is a visual treasure chest for the childish teacher, so that he can make his
pupils still more childish than they were before. As an example for such a manner of teaching, the titles of the compendium of law contain the most appropriate words "de
heredibus suis et legitimis" [we have learned from our heritage, and only the legitimate heritageEd.]. The word heritage has been concretized by a box with a padlock, the
word our by a sow, and the word legitimate by the two tablets of Moses.
75
 76
aphorisms in verse (versus memoriales), where the rhythm has a regular stress that helps the mechanism of memory. One must not speak disdainfully of the prodigies of memory,
Pico della Mirandola, 190 Scaliger,191 Angelo Politian,192 Magliabechi,193 and others, those polyhistorians who carry material194 for the sciences in their heads that would load
a hundred camels with books. We must not scorn them even though they do not possess the faculty of judgment suitable for sifting all this knowledge for practical use. It is
meritorious enough to have produced raw material abundantly, even though other heads must employ themselves later in order to process it with judgment (tantum scimus,
quantum memoria tenemus).195 One of the ancients said: "The art of writing has ruined memory (and made it partly superfluous)."196 There is some truth in this sentence, since
the common man usually has better control of the many things that are thrust upon him, and can devote his attention to one thing after another and, when he has time, to think
about it, because in so doing memory is mechanical, [185] and there is no subtlety involved. On the other hand, the learned man, whose mind holds many different thoughts at
once, is likely to be distracted from his obligations or domestic affairs, because he has not paid sufficient attention to them. But, to be sure, the pocket notebook is a great
convenience in which to write everything stored in our head and to find it easily and exactly. The art of writing always remains a splendid art, because, even if it is not used to
impart knowledge to others, it will still substitute for the most extensive and reliable memory, and can compensate for the lack of it.
A greater evil is forgetfulness (obliviositas), where the head, no matter how often it is filled, always remains as empty as a barrel with holes in it. This reproach is sometimes
undeserved, as in the case of old people who can easily recall events of earlier years although they constantly fail in reference to more recent events. Forgetfulness is often caused
by habitual distraction,
76
 77
which particularly affects ladies who read novels. In this type of reading the lady aims only at entertaining herself for the moment. She knows that what she is reading is only
fiction, and she has complete freedom in letting her imagination run its own course, something which is naturally distracting and which makes for habitual absentmindedness (lackof attention to the present). The inevitable result is a weakening of memory. This practice of killing time and making oneself useless to the world, while later complaining of the
brevity of life, is one of the deadliest attacks on the memory, aside from the fantastic frame of mind which also results from it.
B. On the Faculty of Foreseeing (Praevisio)
§ 35. 197 To possess this faculty is of greater interest than anything else because it is the condition of all possible practice and all possible purposes to which man relates the use of
his powers. All desire contains (doubtful or certain) anticipation of what is possible [186] through foresight. Recalling the past (remembering) occurs only with the intention of
making it possible to foresee the future; we look about us from the standpoint of the present in order to determine something, or to be prepared for something.
Empirical foreseeing is the anticipation of similar cases (exspectatio casuum similium) and requires no knowledge of causes and effects, but only the remembering of observed
events, as they usually follow upon each other. Repeated experiences help to develop skill in empirical anticipation. What the wind and weather will be is of interest to the
navigator and to the farmer. But in this respect we do not reach much farther than the so-called Farmer's Almanac, whose predictions are praised when they come true, and are
forgotten if they do not materialize; thus predictions always receive a certain amount of credit. We could almost believe that Providence has intentionally interwoven the
capriciousness of
77
 78
all sorts of weather so inscrutably that it is not easy for men to make necessary arrangements for every occasion, but rather they need to use their understanding in order to be
prepared for whatever might happen.
Living carelessly (without foresight and care) does not give much credit to a man's understanding; it is like the Carib 198 who sells his sleeping-mat in the morning, and in the
evening is perplexed because he does not know where he will sleep during the night. But as long as no offense against morality is incurred, we may consider him who is hardened
to all sorts of events as a happier man than the one who takes all the joy out of living by looking only on the bleak side of life. Among all the prospects which man can have, the
most comforting is, on the basis of his present moral condition, to look forward to something permanent and to further progress toward a still better prospect. On the other hand, if
he courageously decides from now on to enter upon a new and better way of life, he must often say to himself: "Nothing good will come of it anyway. I have frequently (because
of procrastination) given this promise, but I have always broken it under the pretext of making an exception just this once." Thus the expectation of similar cases makes the
prospect rather bleak.
However, when what may hover over us depends upon fate, rather than upon the use of our free will, looking into [187] the future is either presentiment, that is, foreboding199
(praesensio)* or expectation (praesagitio). Presentiment likewise signifies an occult sense for what is not yet present. Expectation signifies a consciousness of the future through
reflection upon the law of the sequence of events (the law of causality).
* There has recently been a desire to distinguish between the words ahnen and ahnden, but ahnen is not a German word, therefore, we have to consider only the latter.
Ahnden is equivalent to "keep something in mind." Used with the dative it means that something presents itself vaguely to my mind. Used with the accusative it means to
remember someone's deed with malicious intention (that is, to punish). It is always the same notion only used in different ways.
78
 79
We readily see that all presentiment is a chimera; for how can we be aware of what does not exist? If there are judgments arising from obscure concepts of such a causal relation,
then they are not presentiments. On the contrary, we can develop concepts which lead to a causal relation, and we can explain how a causal relation belongs to judgment so
conceived. Presentiments, for the most part, are of the fearful sort. Anxiety, which has physical causes, takes the lead with vagueness as to what the object of fear is. Yet there are
also gay and bold presentiments of enthusiasts who scent the imminent revelation of a mystery even though the human being has not been given such a receptivity of the senses,
and the epoptae 200 believe that they see the unveiling of what they are expecting in mystical intuition. The second sight of the Scottish Highlanders also belongs to this type of
marvel. It is a vision wherein some among them believe they see a man tied to a mast, the news of whose death they claim to have received before the mail could have reached
them.
C. On the Gift of Divination (Facultas Divinatrix)
§ 36201 Predicting, fortune-telling, and prophesying can be distinguished as: the first is foreseeing according to the laws of experience (therefore it is natural); the second is
contrary to the well-known laws of Nature (therefore unnatural); the third, however, is inspired by a cause that is distinct from Nature (therefore supernatural), or at least so
considered. This ability [188] seems to originate from the influence of a god and is also properly called the faculty of divination (whereas every shrewd guess about the future is
improperly called divination also).
To say about someone that he is able to foretell this or that fate may indicate a wholly natural skill. But of one who pretends to a supernatural insight we must say that he is aspecious soothsayer, like the gypsies of Hindu
79
 80
descent, who call fortune-telling from the palm of the hand reading the planets; or 202 like the astrologers, treasure hunters, and the alchemists, who all were outshone in Greek
antiquity by Pythia [priestess of the Delphic oracle], and in our day by the ragged Siberian Shaman. The soothsayings of the auspices and haruspices of the Romans did not
purport to discover what is hidden in the course of the world's events so much as to discover the will of the gods to whom they had joined themselves in accordance with their
regligion. But how the poets came to consider themselves also as inspired (or possessed), and as speaking the truth (vates), and how they could claim to have during their poetical
impulses (furor poeticus) any intuition, can only be explained by the fact that the poet, unlike the prose-orator who prepares his ordered speech well in advance and with plenty of
leisure, has to snatch the favorable moment of his inner mood as it comes over him with its lively and powerful imagery and feeling, while he behaves as if he were only passive.
An old saying explains this by claiming that genius is mixed with a certain amount of madness. The belief in oracular utterances is also based on this observation when passages
from the works of famous poets (who are believed to have been inspired) are chosen at random (sortes Virgilianae);203 or when a means similar to the treasure-chest of the more
modern Pietists is used to uncover the hidden will of heaven; or when the interpretation of the Sibylline Books is concerned, which, it is said, should have foretold for the Romans
the destiny of their state. Alas, they lost parts of204 them because of their misapplied niggardliness.
All prophecies which foretell an inevitable fate of a nation, that is to befall the nation by its own fault and, consequently, which is to be brought about by its own free will, have in
themselves (besides the fact that such knowledge is useless since it cannot be avoided) the absurdity that in this unconditional fate (decretum [189]
80
 81
absolutum) there is thought to be a mechanism of freedom, the concept of which is self-contradictory.
The ultimate of absurdity, or of fraud, in soothsaying may be that a madman has been considered a seer (of invisible things), as if 205 a spirit spoke in him which acted as a
substitute for the soul, already long departed from the body. And so the mentally ill (and epileptic as well) passed for an Energumen (one possessed), and he was called a Mantis
by the Greeks if the possessing demon was considered a good spirit. The interpreter of the Mantis, however, was called a prophet. All foolishness must be exploited so that we can
take possession of the future, the foreseeing of which interests us greatly, by skipping all the steps that might lead us there by means of the understanding through experience. O,
curas hominum!206
Moreover, there is no science of soothsaying so certain and so far-reaching as astronomy, which foretells the revolutions of the heavenly bodies, even to infinity. This, however,
could not curtail a mysticism which instead of making the numbers of historical epochs dependent upon certain events, as reason requires, wanted, on the contrary, to make events
dependent upon certain sacred207 numbers, thereby turning chronology itself, so necessary a condition of all history, into a fable.
On Involuntary Invention in a Sound Mental State, that is, on Dreams
§ 37.208 The investigation of the natural constitution of sleep, dreams, and somnambulism (under which we may include talking aloud during sleep) lies outside the field of a
pragmatic anthropology, because we are unable to deduct from these phenomena
81
 82
any rules 209 of conduct in the state of dreaming, since rules are valid only for people who are awake and do not wish to dream, or210 who want to sleep without being disturbed
by dreams.211 The Greek emperor who condemned to death a man who related to his friends a dream in which he had killed the emperor, under the pretext that ''the man would
not have had such a dream unless he were planning it in his waking hours," is [190] guilty of a judgment both cruel and contrary to experience. "When we are awake, we enjoy a
common world; but, when we are asleep, every man enjoys his own world." Dreaming seems to belong so necessarily to sleeping that sleeping and dying would be just the same
thing, if the dream were not added as a natural, though involuntary, agitation of the inner vital organs by means of the imagination. Thus I remember well that, as a boy, when I
went to sleep tired from playing, I would suddenly awaken at the moment of falling asleep, because of a dream that I had fallen into the water, being turned around and around,
and was on the point of sinking, and I would quickly awaken only to fall asleep again more peacefully. This was probably caused by the reduction of the breathing activity of the
chest muscles, which is completely dependent on the autonomic system, and consequently, with the reduction of breathing, the action of the heart is impeded so that the
imagination of the dream tries to restore the rate of breathing again.212 Here is where the beneficient effect of dreams, in spite of the so-called nightmare (incubus), comes in.
Without the dreadful imagination of a specter oppressing us and the exercise of all muscular power to get into another position, the stopping of the flow of our life's blood would
quickly end our existence. For that very reason Nature seems to have arranged that the majority of dreams contain difficulties and perilous situations, because such ideas excite the
powers of the soul more than when everything goes along as we wish and will. We frequently dream that we cannot rise to our feet, or that we have lost our way, or that we havebecome
82
 83
confused in delivering a sermon, or that before a large audience in a moment of forgetfulness we have put on a nightcap instead of a wig, or that we can fly through the air at will;
or we awaken laughing merrily without knowing why. How it happens that we are placed in a dream in the long distant past, and speak with those long dead, and why we are
tempted to treat it as a dream, although we see ourselves forced to hold imagination as reality, will always remain unexplained. Yet we can take it as certain that there can be no
sleep without a dream, and whoever believes he has not dreamed, simply cannot recall his dream.
[191] On the Faculty of Designation (Facultas Signatrix)
§ 38. 213 The faculty of understanding the present as a means of connecting the conception of what is foreseen with that of the past is the faculty of designation. The action of the
mind in effecting this connection is designation (signatio), which is also called signalizing, of which the highest degree is called attribution.
Forms of objects (as perceived), as far as they serve only as means of perception through notions, are symbols; and any cognition through symbols is called symbolic or figurative
(speciosa). Characters are not yet symbols, because they also can be mediate (indirect) signs which mean nothing by themselves, but mean something by joining with perceptions
and then lead through them to notions. Therefore, symbolic cognition must not be opposed to intuitive but to discursive cognition.214 In the discursive cognition, the sign
(character) accompanies the notion only as a watchman (custos) in order to reproduce the notion when an occasion arises. Symbolic cognition is therefore not opposed to the
intuitive cognition
83
 84
(through sense perception), but rather it is opposed to the intellectual cognition (through notions). Symbols are merely instruments of the understanding; but they are only indirect
instruments by analogy to certain perceptions to which the notion of the symbol can be applied, so that the notion can be provided with meaning through the presentation of an
object.
He who can express himself only in symbols has only a few notions of understanding. What is so often admired as a lively performance, 215 which savages (and sometimes
would-be wise men among primitive people) manifest in their speech, is nothing but a deficiency of notions, and therefore a lack of words to express them. For example, when the
American savage says, "Let us bury the hatchet," he means, "Let us make peace." As a matter of fact, the old songs, from Homer to Ossian, or from Orpheus to the Prophets, owe
their eloquence merely to the lack of means for expressing their concepts.
To claim that the actual phenomena of the world, which present themselves to the senses, are merely a symbol of an intelligible world hidden in the background (as Swedenborg
does),216 is fanaticism. However, in the exhibition of concepts (called ideas) which belong [192] to that morality which is the essence of all religion and which consequently come
from pure reason, we must distinguish the outer shell, useful and necessary for a time, from the thing itself, the symbolic from the intellectual (public worship from religion)this is
enlightenment. If this is not done an Ideal (of pure practical reason) would be replaced by an idol and the final purpose would be unsuccessful. It is not to be disputed that all
peoples on the earth have begun by making such a substitution and that, when it is a matter of what their teachers themselves really intended in composing their sacred writings,
we must not interpret them symbolically but, rather, literally; to twist their words would be unfair. However, when it is not a matter of the veracity of the
84
 85
teacher, but rather essentially of the truth of the doctrine, then we can and ought to interpret the writings as only a symbolic type of representation through which established
forms and customs are to accompany those practical ideas, because otherwise the intellectual meaning, which constitutes the final purpose, would be lost. 217
§ 39.218 We can divide signs into voluntary (artificial), natural, and miraculous signs.219
A. To the first type belong 1) signs of gesticulation (imitative, which are also partly natural); 2) characters (letters, which are signs for sounds); 3) tone signs (notes); 4) signs
agreed upon between individuals, for the purposes of communication (ciphers); 5) class signs of free men honored with hereditary superiority (coats of arms); 6) signs of service,
in prescribed costume (uniforms and livery); 7) badges of honor, for service (ribbons awarded by orders); 8) signs of dishonor (brandings and so forth). To this type also belong
the literary signs of pause, question or emotion, and astonishment (signs of punctuation) in written material.220
All language is a signification of thought; the supreme way of indicating thought is by language, the greatest instrument for understanding ourselves and others. Thinking isspeaking to ourselves. (The Indians of Tahiti call it "the language inside the body.") Consequently, there is also hearing ourselves inwardly (by means of the reproductive
imagination). To the man born deaf, speaking is a feeling of play of lips, tongue, and jaw; and it is hardly possible to imagine that he does more when speaking than carry on a
play with physical221 feelings, without thinking or having real concepts. [193] Yet even those who can speak and hear do not always understand either themselves or others. This
is to be attributed to the lack of the power of designation, or to its faulty use (when signs are taken for things, and vice versa), and to the fact that men, especially where reason
85
 86
is concerned, who speak the same language are miles apart in regard to concepts. This is manifest only by chance, when each person is dealing with his own concepts.
B. Concerning the natural signs, the relation of signs to things signified is, depending on the time, either demonstrative, or remonstrative, or prognostic.
The pulse signifies to the physician the presence of a feverish condition in the patient, just as smoke signifies fire. Reagents reveal to the chemist elements concealed in water, just
as the weathercock reveals the wind, and so forth. However, whether blushing betrays consciousness of guilt, or rather a delicate sense of honor, or just a response to the
imputation of something of which one would have to be ashamed, is quite uncertain in particular instances.
Burial mounds and tombs are signs of remembrance of the dead, just as pyramids are perpetual reminders of the former great power of a king. The layers of shells in districts
situated far from the sea, the holes of the Pholades in the high Alps, or volcanic residue [in places] where fire no longer bursts forth from the earth, signify to us the ancient
condition of the world and provide the basis for an archeology of nature, though, to be sure, they are not so plainly visible as the scars of a wounded warrior. The ruins of
Palmyra, Balbek, and Persepolis are telling monuments of the state of art in ancient nations, 222 as well as sad indications223 of the change of all things.
Prognostic signs are the most interesting of all, because the present is but a moment in the series of changes, and human desire leads us to ponder the presently only for the sake of
future consequences (ob futura consequentia), thus making us especially attentive to these signs. In regard to future events in the world, the surest prognosis is in astronomy.224
But it is childish and fantastic when heavenly configurations, conjunctions, and al86
 87
tered positions of plants are represented (in the Astrologia Judiciaria) as allegorical signs in the heavens of impending human 225 destinies.
[194] Natural, prognostic signs of an impending illness or convalescence, or (like the facies Hippocratica) of imminent death, are phenomena which, based upon long and frequent
experience, serve the physician as a guide in administering his cure even after226 the discovery of the relation between cause and effect. The same holds true for the so-called
critical days.227 Yet228 the auguries and haruspices, set up by the Romans for political purposes, were a superstition sanctioned by the government in order to direct the people in
perilous times.
C. Among the miraculous signs (events in which the nature of things reverses itself), apart from those of which we do not yet make anything (monstrosities among men and
animals), there are signs and wonders in the skycomets, balls of light shooting through the high atmosphere, northern lights, solar and lunar eclipses. It is especially when several
such signs coincide, and are accompanied by war, pestilence, and so forth, that they are thought by the great terrified populace to herald the imminent doomsday and the end of the
world.
Appendix
The marvelous play of the human imagination is worth mentioning. It involves the confusing of signs for things, so that an inner reality is posited for signs as if things had to
conform to them. Since the course of the moon in its four phases (new moon, first quarter, full moon, and last quarter) cannot be divided in whole numbers more exactly than into
twenty-eight days (and the zodiac of the Arabians is divided into twenty-eight houses of the moon), of which one-fourth makes seven days, the number seven has thereby acquired
a mystical
87
 88
importance. Consequently the creation of the world had also to comply with this observation, particularly when there were to be (according to the Ptolemaic system) seven planets,
seven 229 tones in a scale, seven primary colors in the rainbow, and seven metals. Hence climacteric years also came into existence230 (seven times seven, and, nine also being a
mystical number for the people of India, seven times nine, as well as nine times nine), upon the conclusion of which human life is supposed to be in greatest danger. The seventy
prophetic weeks231 (that is, 490 years) also constitute in Judeo-Christian chronology not only the divisions of the most important events (between God's call [195] to Abraham
and the birth of Christ), but they determine quite exactly the limit of life, so to speak a priori, as if chronology did not have to be guided by history, but, vice versa, that historyhad to be guided by chronology.
There are other instances, also, in which it is habitual to make things depend upon numbers. When a physician, to whom a patient sends the fee by a servant, unwraps the paper
and finds therein eleven ducats, he becomes suspicious that the servant may have stolen one, for why should there not be a full dozen? At an auction the person who buys a set of
porcelain will bid less when there is not a full dozen. If there should be thirteen plates, the only value he would place on the thirteenth would be that, should one be broken, he still
would have the full dozen. But if one does not invite a dozen guests, what reason can there be for giving preeminence to this precise number? In his will a man bequeathed to his
cousin eleven silver spoons and added: "Why I do not bequeath him the twelfth, he himself will know best" (the dissolute young man at his table had secretly stuck a spoon in his
pocket, and the old man had noticed it, but did not care to shame him.232 Upon reading the will one could easily guess what the meaning of the testator was, though only from the
preconceived judgment that nothing but a dozen would be a full number. The twelve signs
88
 89
of the zodiac (a number which seems to be considered analogous to the twelve jurors in England) have also acquired such a mystical meaning. In Italy, Germany, and in other
places perhaps, 233 a table of thirteen guests is taken as ominous because it is supposed that one of them, whosoever it may be, will die in the same year;234 just as at a table of
twelve jurors, the thirteenth, who finds himself among them, can be no other than the defendant who will be judged. (I have found myself at such a table where the lady of the
house upon sitting down noticed this supposedly evil state of affairs and quietly ordered her son who was numbered among us to eat in another room, so that the gaiety might not
be disturbed.) The mere magnitude of a number, when there are enough of the things it denotes, arouses our astonishment by the fact that it does not, in counting, complete a round
number according to the decadic system (which in itself is quite arbitrary). The emperor [196] of China reportedly has a fleet of 9,999 ships, and one secretly asks oneself, why
not one more? Although the answer might be: "Because this number of ships is sufficient for his needs." In reality, however, the question does not address itself to the needs, but
rather to the implication of numerical mysticism. It is still worse,235 although not unusual, when anyone, who has brought his fortune to 90,000 thalers by means of fraud and
stinginess, cannot rest until he has the full 100,000, even though he does not use it. Achieving this goal, he probably deserves the gallows, even though he does not get it.
To what childishness does man descend in his ripe old age, when he allows himself to be held by the leash of sensuousness! Let us now see how much better or worse he fares
when he pursues his course in the light of understanding.
89
 90
On the Faculty of Cognition as Far as It Is Based on Understanding
§ 40. 236 Understanding as the faculty of thinking (representing something by means of concepts), is called the higher cognitive faculty (as distinguished from sensuousness,
which is the lower), because the faculty of perceptions (pure or empirical) contains nothing but the particulars of objects, whereas the faculty of concepts contains the universals of
the ideas of the objects, that is, the rule to which the multitude of sensuous perceptions must be subordinated, so that unity in the cognition of the object can be achieved. Certainly
understanding is of higher rank than sensibility.237 Irrational animals can get along with sensibility alone following their implanted instincts, like a nation without a head of state.
However, a head of state without a nation (like understanding without sensibility) has no power at all. Between the two, moreover, there is no actual dispute about rank, though
one is considered higher and the other lower.
The word understanding is, however, also taken in a particular sense if it is subordinated to understanding in a general sense as one member of classification, together with two
other faculties; and then [197] the higher cognitive faculty (materially, that is, considered not by itself, but rather in relation to the cognition of objects), consists of understanding,
judgment, and Reason. Let us now observe how one man differs from another in this mental faculty, or how his customary use or misuse is distinguished, first in a healthy mind,
and then also in mental illness.
90
 91
Anthropological Comparison of the Three Higher Cognitive Faculties with Each Other 238
§ 41.239 The correct240 understanding excels not only through abundance of concepts but also through the proper concepts for the cognition of an object; consequently, it leads to
the apprehension of truth through ability and skill. Many a man has a lot of concepts in his head, which altogether tend toward similarity with what one wants to hear from him;
but when it comes to the object and its determination, the concepts miss the mark. Such a man may have concepts of vast scope, and may even be a man of adroit concepts.
Correct understanding, which is sufficient for concepts of general cognition, is said to be sound understanding (sufficient for all needs). Such an understanding says, with the
sergeant of the cavalry in Juvenal: Quod sapio satis est mihi, non ego curoesse quod Arcesilas aerumnosique Solones.241 It goes without saying that Nature's gift of a precise andcorrect understanding will know to limit itself in regard to the range of knowledge expected of it, and that the man endowed with such understanding will use it modestly.242
§ 42.243 If the word understanding means the faculty of cognition of rules (and this is done through concepts), so that the understanding encompasses the entire higher cognitive
faculty, then the rules are not to be understood as those by which Nature guides man in his behavior, as occurs in animals which are motivated by natural instinct; but, rather, as
only such rules which man himself makes.244 What man merely learns, and thus entrusts to his memory, he performs only mechanically (in accordance with the laws of
reproductive
91
 92
imagination) and he does it without the use of his understanding. A servant, who has to pay a compliment merely in order to comply with established form, needs no
understanding, that is, he does not have to think for himself. But when the master is away and domestic affairs are his own responsibility [198] then many rules of behavior have
to be observed which cannot be literally prescribed.
Correct understanding, expert judgment, and well-founded reason comprise the whole scope of the intellectual cognitive faculty, especially when this faculty is also judged as an
ability for the promotion of the practical, that is, of certain ends and purposes.
Correct understanding is sound understanding as long as it maintains the properness of concepts necessary for the purpose for which they are used. By joining sufficiency
(sufficientia) and exactitude (praecisio), we arrive at properness, which constitutes the quality of the concept. Properness contains neither more nor less than the object demands
(conceptus rem adaequans). 245 Consequently, a correct understanding is the first and foremost of all the intellectual faculties because it satisfies246 its end with the least means.
Craftiness, the use of the head for intrigue, is often mistaken for great, though misused, understanding; but it is only a way of thinking247 of very narrow-minded people, and is
quite different from cleverness though it does have a semblance to it. One can deceive a person only once, a fact that is very disadvantageous to the subsequent plans of the crafty
man.
The domestic or civil servant under orders needs only to have understanding. The officer, to whom only a general rule is prescribed, and who is then left on his own, needs
judgment to decide for himself what should be done in a given case. The general, who must consider potential future cases and who must think out rules on his own, must have
Reason. The talents necessary for such different uses are very distinct. ''Many a man shines in the
92
 93
second rank, who would be invisible in the first." (Tel brille au second rang qui s'éclipse au premier.) 248
Quibbling is not the same thing as having understanding. And to draw up maxims only for show, as Christina of Sweden did, maxims against which her conduct stood in
opposition, cannot be called reasonable. This asks for an answer like the one the Duke of Rochester gave to the English King Charles II, when the king met him in deep
meditation. The King asked, "Why are you thinking so deeply?" Answer: "I am composing your Majesty's epitaph." King: "How does it run?" Answer: "Here lies [199] King
Charles II, who said many wise things in his life but never did anything wise."249
To be silent in company, and only occasionally to make a very general judgment, looks like being reasonable, just as a certain degree of rudeness is passed off as (old-fashioned
German) frankness.
By instruction natural understanding can also be enriched with many concepts, and it can be provided with rules. But the second intellectual faculty of distinguishing whether
something is under the rule or not, which is the faculty of judgment (judicium), cannot be taught, but only exercised. Consequently, the growth of the second faculty engenders
maturity, and increasing understanding, which comes only with the passage of time. It is also easy to see that this could not be otherwise, because instruction communicates the
rules. Therefore, if there were any doctrines concerning judgment, then there would have to be general rules by which we may distinguish whether or not something agrees with
the rule. Such a process would ask questions ad infinitum. The nature, then, of the understanding is that it does not come for years, that it is based upon one's own long experience;
and whose judgment the French250 Republic seeks in the assembly of the so-called Elders.
This faculty, which concerns itself only with what is feasible, what is fitting, and what is proper (for techni93
 94
cal, 251 aesthetic, and practical judgment), is not as brilliant as those faculties which are generative.252 It only accompanies sound understanding, and links understanding withReason.
§ 43.253 If understanding is the faculty of rules, and judgment is the faculty of discovering the particular, so far as it is an instance of this rule, reason, then, is the faculty of
deriving the particular from the universal, and of representing the particular according to principles and as necessary. One can also explain reason by referring to the capacity of
judging and acting (in a practical sense) according to fundamental principles. Man needs reason for every moral (and consequently also religious) judgment, he cannot build on
dogmas and established customs. Ideas are concepts of reason, which cannot be represented adequately by any object within the realm of experience. They are [200] neither
perceptions (like those of Space and Time) nor feelings (such as eudaemonic desires), both of which belong to sensibility. Ideas are, instead, concepts of perfection which we may
always approach but never completely attain.
Pedantic reasoning (without sound Reason) is a use of reason which misses its final purpose, partly from inability, and partly from a mistake concerning the point of view. To
rave with reason is to proceed according to principles in the form of one's thoughts,254 but as to matter and255 scope, the means just run opposite to one's intentions.
Subordinates must not try to guide themselves by pedantic reasoning because the principle which should be employed must often be concealed from them, or at least remain
unknown to them.256 But the general or commanding officer must have reason, because instructions cannot be given him for every case that might arise.257 Yet to require that a
so-called layman (laicus) should not use his own reason in religious matters, particularly since religion is to be appreciated as moral, but
94
 95
instead follow the appointed clergyman (clericus) and thus someone else's reason, is an unjust demand because as to morals every man must account for all his doings. The
clergyman will not and even cannot assume such a responsibility.
In cases like these however, men are inclined to seek more security for their own person so that they neglect completely their own use of reason and submit passively and
obediently to precepts laid down by holy men. People do this not so much by feeling inept with regard to insight (for the essence of all religion is morality, which becomes evident
to every person rather soon), but, rather, they do it out of craftiness, partly in order to push the blame upon someone else when a mistake has been made, and partly, and more
particularly, to escape gracefully from anything that is essential (like a change of mind), which is much more difficult to perform than the ritual of worship.
Wisdom, as the Idea of a perfect 258 and practical use of reason, is an expectation which may be too ambitious to require of human beings. Even someone else cannot infuse
wisdom into a person to the least degree; on the contrary, it must grow out of a man's own self. The guidelines for achieving wisdom consist of three leading maxims: 1) Think for
yourself; 2) (in communication with other people) Put yourself in the place of the other person; 3) Always think by remaining faithful to your own self.259
[201] The age at which man reaches the full use of his reason can be fixed, in respect to his skill (the capacity to fulfill a certain purpose), somewhere in his twentieth year; in
respect to his cleverness (in using other men for his own purposes), in the fortieth; and finally, in respect to wisdom, somewhere in the sixtieth year. In this last period wisdom is
more negative, it is inclined to see all the follies of the first two periods; and at this point we can say: "It is too bad to have to die now, when we have learned for the first time
how we could260 have lived
95
 96
properly." But such judgment is rather uncommon in this period because as the attachment to life becomes stronger the more the value of life decreases in both action and
enjoyment.
§ 44. 261 Just as the faculty of discovering the particular for the universal (the rule) is called judgment, so the faculty of discovering the universal for the particular is called
intelligence (ingenium). Judgment concentrates on detecting the differences within the manifold as to partial identities; intelligence concentrates on marking the identity within the
manifold as to partial differences. The superior talent of both lies in noticing either the smallest similarity or dissimilarity. The faculty to do this is acuteness (acumen), and
observations of this sort are called subtleties, which, if they do not advance knowledge, are either called262 empty sophistries or conceited prattlings (vanae argutationes) even
though the understanding has not been used in an untrue but, nevertheless, useless way. Acuteness is, consequently, bound not only to the faculty of judgment, but applies to
intelligence as well. In the first case it is considered valuable more for the sake of exactitude (cognitio exacta), while in the second instance it is on account of the fertility of the
good mind. Therefore, intelligence is said to be blooming, and, just as Nature seems to be more at play with her blossoms, but tending to business with her fruits, so the talent
encountered in the intelligence is ranked lower in influence (in respect to the aims of Reason) than the faculty of judgment. Common and sound understanding lays claim neither
to intelligence nor to acuteness, both furnish a kind of luxury of mind, whereas common, sound understanding limits itself to what is truly needed.
96
 97[202] On the Soul's Weaknesses and Illnesses with Respect to Its Cognitive Faculty
A. General Division
§ 45. 263 The defects of the faculty of cognition are either mental weaknesses or mental illnesses. The illnesses of the soul with regard to the cognitive faculty can be listed under
two main types. The one is melancholia (hypochondria) and the other is mental disorder (mania). A melancholic man is well aware that the train of his thought does not move
properly, but he has not sufficient control over himself to direct, restrain, or control the course of his thought. Unjustified joy and grief whimsically change in such a person like
the weather which one has to accept as it comes. Mental disorder indicates a voluntary264 stream of thoughts which follows its own (subjective) law. The subjective law runs
contrary to the (objective) law which is in agreement with the rules of experience.
With regard to sense perception, mental disturbance is either irrationality or insanity. As to perversity of judgment and reason, it is known as delirium or imbecility. If a person
habitually fails (by daydreaming) to compare his imagination with the laws of experience, he is a visionary (a whimsical person). If he does so because of emotional excitement,
he is an enthusiast. Unexpected fits of the stricken person are called attacks of fancy (raptus).
The simpleton, the imprudent, the stupid, the coxcomb, the fool, and the buffoon are all different from the mentally disordered. They differ not merely in degree but in the
distinctive quality of mental discord. Despite their failings these people do not belong in a madhouse. A madhouse is a place where people, not withstanding
97
 98
maturity and age, must be controlled even as to their most trifling affairs of life by someone else's reason. Insanity accompanied by emotional excitement is called madness. It is
often present from the beginning, but it may also spring up unexpectedly like poetic inspiration 265 (furor poeticus), and in such cases it may border on genius. When such an
attack of a facile but uncontrolled flood of ideas [203] affects reason, it is called fanaticism. Brooding over one and the same idea, to which there is no possible solution, like the
loss of a spouse who cannot be called back to life, is stupid foolishness. Such a person tries to find peace in the pain. Superstition is more comparable to insanity, and fanaticism,
to delirium. The mental derangement of the fanatic is often called (in mild terms) exaltation, but it might also be called eccentricity.
The wild talk of persons in fever, or an attack of fury, akin to epilepsy, which may occasionally be brought on sympathetically by powerful imagination when someone is
confronted merely with the blank, staring gaze of a madman (for this reason people with unsteady nerves are advised not to extend their curiosity to the cells where these
unfortunates are kept), are not to be taken for insanity because of their temporary nature. But what is called a quirk (which is not a mental sickness, because we usually mean by
mental sickness a sad melancholic derangement of the inner sense) is mostly a certain person's conceit which borders on insanity. Such a person's demand that others, upon
comparison with him, should despise themselves, is a desire which runs counter to its own purpose (like that of a crazy man). By raising such a claim, he excites these people to
check his vanity in every possible way, so that they are eager to tease him, and to expose him to ridicule because of his offensive foolishness. Milder is the expression of a whim
(marotte) which someone entertains. It is supposed to be a popular fad that never meets the approval of intelligent people. For example, the gift of presentiment, inspirations
similar to those of the genius of Socrates, and qualities purported
98
 99
to be grounded in experience but really based on such unaccountable influences as sympathy, antipathy, and idiosyncracy (qualitates occultae) are all chirping like a cricket in the
person's head; but no one else can hear them. The mildest of all deviations across the borderline of sound understanding is the hobbyhorse. It reflects a fondness for the occupation
with objects of the imagination, with which the understanding only plays for amusement. Rather than involving oneself with serious business, the hobbyhorse provides something
like busy idleness. For old folks, retiring people, and the well-to-do who are returning again to the carefree life of childhood, this frame of mind is not only a health-bringing
excitement which keeps one's vitality alive, but it is also something charming and at the same time, something to chuckle about, yet in such a way that [204] the one laughed about
can join in laughing happily with the others. However, with youths and busy people such hobby-riding also serves as recreation; and scoffers, who denounce these harmless little
follies with pedantic seriousness, deserve Sterne's reprimand: "Let everybody ride his own hobbyhorse up and down the streets of the city, as long as he does not make you sit
behind him." 266
B. On Mental Weaknesses in the Cognitive Faculty
§ 46.267 He who lacks intelligence is a dull person (obtusum caput). He may, by the way, have a good head in matters of understanding and reason. But we must not demand of
him that he play the poet, as happened in the case of Clavius, whose schoolmaster wanted to apprentice him to a blacksmith because he could not make verses. Clavius became a
great mathematician as soon as he got hold of a book of mathematics. A mind of slow apprehension is therefore not necessarily a weak mind. The one who is alert with
abstractions is not always profound, he is more often very superficial.
Lack of judgment without intelligence is stupidity99
 100
(stupiditas). But the same lack of judgment accompanied by intelligence is silliness. He who exhibits judgment in business is clever. If, in addition, he has intelligence as well, he
is called wise. 268 The jester, as well as the sophist, who only conceitedly exhibit these characteristics, are disgusting fellows. Through failures one becomes intelligent; but the
one who has trained himself in this subject so that he can make others wise through their own failures, has used his intelligence. Ignorance is not stupidity. Consider the reply of a
certain lady to the question of an academician: "Do the horses eat at night too?" She replied: "How can such a learned man be so stupid?" Ignorance is usually evidence of a good
understanding as long as a person knows how to ask good questions (in order to learn either from nature or from another person).
Simple is he who cannot grasp much through his understanding, but he is not stupid unless he grasps it incorrectly. Honest but stupid (as some improperly describe Pomeranian
servants) is a false and highly reprehensible aphorism. It is false because honesty (which is respect for duty based upon principles) is practical reason. [205] It is highly
reprehensible because it presupposes that everyone would deceive if only he felt skillful enough to do so; and that everyone who does not deceive merely displays his own
inability. Hence the proverbs: "He has not invented gunpowder"; "He will not betray his country"; "He is no wizard," speak of misanthropic principles which say, that, assuming
the good will in men whom we know, we still cannot be sure. We can only be sure when we know of their inability. Thus, Hume says, the Grand Sultan does not entrust his harem
to the virtue of those who are said to guard the harem, but rather to the guards' inability (as black eunuchs).269 Being very limited (narrow-minded) as to the range of one's
concepts does not constitute stupidity, but what matters is the quality of the concepts (that is, the fundamental principles). That people allow themselves to be engaged
100
 101
in treasure seeking, alchemy, and trading in lotteries, is not to be attributed to their stupidity, but to their evil intent in wanting to get rich at the expense of others without a
proportionate effort of their own. Craftiness, cunning, slyness (versutia, astutia) is the art of deceiving others. The question is: Whether the deceiver must be wiser than the one
who is easily deceived, and whether the latter is the stupid one? The sincere man who readily trusts (believes, and gives credit), is sometimes, but very unjustly, called a fool
because he is an easy catch for rogues; as the proverb says: "When the fool goes to market, the merchants rejoice." It is true and wise that I should never again trust the one who
has once deceived me, because he is corrupt as to his fundamental principles. However, never to trust any other man, just because one man has deceived me, is misanthropy. The
deceiver is really the fool. But what if one great deception has enabled a man to place himself in such a position that he no longer needs another person and the person's
confidence? In that case the character under which he appears may completely change, but only in that, instead of being laughed at as a deceived deceiver, the unfortunate fellow
is spat upon, and there is not even a permanent advantage in that.*
* The Palestinians, living among us, or at least the greatest number of them, have through their usurious spirit since their exile received the not-unfounded reputation of
deceivers. It seems strange to think of a nation of deceivers; but it is just as strange to think of a nation made up of nothing but merchants, which are united for the most
part by an old superstition that is recognized by the government [2061 under which they live. They do not seek any civil honor, but rather wish to compensate their loss by
profitably outwitting the very people among whom they find protection, and even to make profit from their own kind. It cannot be otherwise with a whole nation of
merchants, who are nonproductive members of society (for example, the Jews in Poland). Their condition, sanctioned by ancient precepts and recognized even by us (who
share certain holy books with them, and among whom they live), cannot be altered by us without serious consequences, even though they have made the saying "buyer be
aware" the supreme principle of morality in their dealings with us. In place of the futile project of moralizing about this nation with regard to the matter of deception and
honor, I prefer to outline my own conjecture of the origin of this peculiar condition (that is, of a nation composed of nothing but merchants). In the
(footnote continued on the next page)
101
 102
§ 47. 270 [206] Distraction (distractio) is the state of diverting attention (abstractio) from certain ruling ideas by means of shifting to other dissimilar ideas. If the distraction is
intentional, it is called dissipation; if it is involuntary it is absentmindedness (absentia).
One of the mental weaknesses is to be attached, through reproductive imagination, to an idea to which one has given great or lasting attention, and from which one is not able to
get away, that is, one is not able to set the course of imagination free again. [207] If this evil is habitual and directed to one and the same object, it may possibly result in insanity.
To be distracted in society is impolite, and often laughable as well. Women are ordinarily not subject to this impulse, unless they devote themselves to learning. A servant who
looks distracted
(footnote continued from the previous page)most ancient times riches were brought [MS: to Asia (Minor)Ed.] by trade with India, and from thence by land to the western shores of the Mediterranean Sea, and to parts
of Phoenicia (to which Palestine belongs). Indeed, wealth had been able to make its way to many other places, for example, to Palmyra, to Tyre in ancient times, to Sidon,
and by means of a trip over the sea, to Eziongeber and Eloth [cities on the Red SeaTrans.], as well as from the Arabian coast to Thebes, and thence across Egypt to the
Syrian coast; but, Palestine, with its capital Jerusalem was very well-situated for caravan trade. Probably the phenomenon of the former [MS: uniqueEd.] riches of Solomon
was due to the location of Palestine; and even up to Roman times the surrounding country was full of merchants. Because they had far-reaching commercial relations with
people of their own language and religion, these merchants, after the destruction of their city, were able to migrate gradually into far-distant lands (in Europe) taking
language and religion with them, maintaining their connection with each other, and finding security in whatever countries they went to because of their profitable
bargaining. Therefore, we may suppose that their dispersion throughout the world, with their unity in religion and language, must not be attributed to a curse that had been
inflicted upon this people. On the contrary, the dispersion must be considered as a blessing, especially since the wealth of the Jews, if we think of them as individuals,
apparently exceeds per capita that of any other nation at the present time. [MS: last two sentences are slightly different, ''therefore the greatest disaster of the state turned
into the greatest luck of its citizens. It is to be assumed that the riches in money of this widely-scattered people would exceed the riches of any other nation of the same
number, if all their riches would be added up (about which Morris Langallerie has made a proposal). Provided that riches mean happinessEd.]
102
 103
while waiting on table is usually thinking of something evil, either he is plotting something or he thinks about the possible consequences.
To distract oneself 271 is to relax one's involuntary reproductive imagination in order to check the flow of afterthoughts in one's head as, for example, the clergyman does when
he has delivered his memorized sermon. This is a necessary and partially artificial way of taking care of one's mental well being. A continual reflection on one and the same
subject leaves you with reverberations, so to speak (like the repetitive theme of dance music which is still hummed by those who are returning home from a fête; or, like children
who incessantly repeat the selfsame bon mot of their liking, especially when it has a rhythmic sound). Such an echo molests the mind, and the only way to get rid of it is by
distraction and by focusing the attention upon some other object, for example, reading the newspapers. Recovering control of oneself (collectio animi) in order to be ready for each
new task furthers mental health by restoring the balance between one's powers of the soul. The most wholesome means of recovering control is social conversation on various
subjects, similar to playing. Such conversation must not change from one subject to another by violating the natural relationship of ideas, for then the state of mental distraction
would break up the company because everything is confused and the unity of conversation is entirely lacking. Furthermore, the mind would find itself disturbed and in need of new
distraction in order to restore balance again.
One can see from this that there is an (uncommon) art which helps maintain mental regimentation, whereby a busy man may distract himself in order to collect his powers. But
when one has collected one's thoughts, that is, when one has set them in readiness, so that they may be used as desired, then one cannot call a person distracted [208] who is
purposely immersed in his own thought. On an inappropriate occasion or when he is
103
 104
turning to another conversation, so that he cannot pay enough attention to the ongoing conversation, such a person can only be blamed for absentmindedness, something which is
improper on social occasions. Thus it is an unusual art, to be able to distract oneself without ever appearing distracted. If distraction is habitual, it gives the person who is afflicted
with this evil the appearance of a dreamer, and it makes him useless for society because, without checking his imagination by reason, he blindly follows the free play of his
imagination. The reading of novels, in addition to causing many other mental discords, has also the consequence that it makes distraction habitual. Although through the depiction
of characters, who actually can be found among men (even if with some exaggeration), thoughts are given the coherence of a true story which always has to be presented in a
certain systematic way, the mind nevertheless is at the same time free enough to invent digressions (still other fictional occurrences) during the reading. On this account the train of
thought becomes fragmentary, so that one lets ideas of one and the same object become scattered (sparsim) instead of conjoining (conjunctim) them in the mind according to the
unity of the understanding. The teacher from the pulpit or in the academic lecture-hall, the prosecutor or the attorney who has to demonstrate mental composure in free speaking
(on the spur of the moment) or at least in conversation, must each pay attention to three things. First, he must concentrate on what he is now saying, in order to represent it clearly;
second, he must look back to what he has said; and third, he must look forward to what he intends to say. If he fails to give consideration to any of these three, and if he fails to
arrange them in this order, then he will certainly be distracting both himself and his listeners or readers. An otherwise good mind cannot disregard these rules without being called
confused.
104
 105
§ 48. 272 A generally sound understanding (without any mental weakness) can also be accompanied by weaknesses with regard to its exercise. Such weaknesses entail either a
delay until the growth to proper maturity or they even necessitate one's being represented by someone else in matters of a civil nature. An otherwise healthy person's (natural orlegal) inability to use his own understanding in civil affairs is taken care of by tutelage. If the inability is based upon immaturity of age, it is called minority (being under age), if it
is based upon legal [209] arrangements, in respect to civil affairs, it may then be called legal or civil tutelage.
Children are naturally minors and their parents are their natural guardians. The wife, whatever her age, is declared to be a minor in civil matters, and the husband is her natural
custodian. If she lives with him, but keeps her estate for herself, then another person is the custodian. Although the wife, by the nature of her sex, has a glib enough tongue to
represent herself and her husband when it comes to speaking, even in a court of law (concerning what is mine and thine), she could be declared to be more than of age according
to the letter. But just as women are not expected to be drafted because of their sex, so women cannot defend their rights personally. In order to take care of their civil affairs they
must employ a representative. Such legal tutelage, in respect to public transactions, makes women even more powerful as to domestic welfare, because the rights of the weaker sex
apply here, which the masculine sex by his nature feels called upon to honor and defend.
Yet to make oneself behave like a minor, degrading as it may be, is, nevertheless, very comfortable. Naturally it has not escaped leaders who are known to utilize the docility of
the masses (because they hardly unite on their own). The leaders have also recognized that letting the masses think on their own without guidance by others is dangerous, even
lethal. Heads of state call themselves
105
 106
fathers of the country because they know better how to make their subjects happy than the subjects themselves understand. But the people are condemned to permanent tutelage in
respect to their own best welfare. When Adam Smith 273 improperly says that rulers were, without exception, the greatest spendthrifts of all, he is strongly refuted by the (wise!)
sumptuary laws passed in many countries.
The clergy holds the layman firmly and continually in tutelage. The people have no voice and no judgment as to the way which leads them to the kingdom of heaven. People are
not to use their own eyes to get there; they will be led, and even though Holy Scriptures are placed in their hands so that they may see with their own eyes, they are at once
warned by their guardians [210] not to discover therein anything other than what the guardians certify to be contained in them. The mechanical management of men under the
regimen of others is everywhere the surest means of maintaining lawful order.
Learned men usually allow themselves to be kept in a state of tutelage by their wives as far as domestic arrangements are concerned. When a servant shrieked that there was a fire
in one of the rooms, a learned man, buried in books, answered, "You know, things of that sort are my wife's affair." Finally, a spendthrift, who has already reached majority
according to the law, can bring upon himself a reversion to civil minority if, after274 legally attaining majority, he shows a deficiency in intelligence as to the management of his
estate, which clarifies him as a child or an imbecile. Judgment, about this, however, lies outside the field of anthropology.
§ 49. Dull275 (hebes), like an untempered knife or hatchet, is he to whom nothing can be taught; he is unfit for learning. The person who has only the skill of imitation is a
copycat; but he who can be the author of
106
 107
intellectual and artistic productions is a man who has a head. Quite different from this is simplicity (as opposed to artificiality), 276 of which some say, "Perfect art again becomes
Nature," and in which one succeeds only late in life. Simplicity is a faculty of arriving at the same end through sparing one's means, that is, arriving by the most direct way. The
person who possesses this gift (a wise man) is, by virtue of his simplicity, not at all simplistic.
The man who cannot get used to business is stupid because he has no power of judgment.
A fool is he who sacrifices things of value to purposes which are of no value; for example, he sacrifices domestic bliss to splendor outside of his house. When foolishness is
offensive, it is buffoonery. We may call someone foolish without insulting him; in fact, he may call himself foolish; but to become the object of rogues (according to Pope) and be
called a fool cannot be taken by anyone with equanimity.* Haughtiness is foolishness, primarily because it is stupid to expect [211] of others that they should regard themselves
lowly in comparison with myself. As a consequence they would always play tricks on me to defeat my purposes so that the laughs would be on me. But such an imputation would
also imply insult, and insult produces well-deserved hate. The word fool applied to a woman does not have the same harsh meaning as the word fool applied to a man, because a
man does not feel that he can be insulted by the conceited presumption of a woman. And so foolishness appears to apply solely to the notion of male haughtiness. If we call a man
who injures himself (temporarily or perpetually) a fool, and consequently add hate to our contempt of him, though he has not injured us directly, then we must consider his
foolishness as an offense to human-
* If one replies to someone's joke: "You can't be serious," it is a mild way of saying, "You are jesting," or "You are not judicious." A judicious man is a correct and
practical, but artless judge. Nature alone can make a man judicious, experience can make a judicious man wise, that is, it can enable him in the artful use of the
understanding.107
 108
ity in general and hence as an offense directed against someone else. Whoever acts contrary to his own legitimate interest is also at times called a fool, even though he injures only
himself. Arouet, Voltaire's father, said to someone who congratulated him upon his famous sons, "I have two fools for sons; the first is a fool in prose, the other in verse." (One
had thrust himself into Jansenism and was persecuted; the other had to make amends in the Bastille for his satirical poems.) In general, a madman values things too highly,
whereas a fool values himself more highly than he should if he were sensible.
Labeling a person a dandy or a fop is based upon the concept of impudence as foolishness. The dandy is a young fool; the fop is an old one; both are misled by rogues or
pranksters. The dandy draws our pity; the fop, however, draws bitter contempt. A witty German philosopher and poet illustrated the French epithets fat and sot (under the generic
name fou) by the following example. "The dandy," he said, "is a young German on the way to Paris. The fop is the very same person having just returned from Paris." 277
Complete mental weakness [212] which either does not suffice for even animal activities (as among the Cretins of Valais) or which is just sufficient for a mere mechanical
imitation of external actions which animals can perform (such as sawing, digging, and so forth) is called idiocy. This should not be called sickness of soul, but rather lack of soul
instead.
C. On Mental Ailments
§ 50.278 The major division, as already mentioned above,279 is the division into melancholia (hypochondria) and mental disorder (mania).280 The name of the former281 is
derived as analogous to being startled by the chirping noise of a house-cricket in the quiet of the night. The noise disturbs the peace of mind necessary for sleep. The illness of the
hypochondriac is
108
 109
such that certain inner, bodily sensations do not only disclose an actually existent illness inside the body, but they can also cause an illness because human nature, by virtue of a
peculiar quality lacking in animals, can strengthen or sustain a feeling by centering attention on certain local impressions. 282 On the other hand, either intentional abstraction, or
abstraction caused by other distracting occupations, may weaken the symptoms and, if such abstraction becomes habitual, the illness may disappear altogether.* In such a way
hypochondria, considered as melancholia, becomes the cause for taking imaginary physical ills for something actual. The patient is well aware that these are imaginings, but from
time to time he is unable to break loose from them. Or, conversely, from a genuine physical discomfort (like intestinal pressure caused from having eaten flatulent food),
hypochondria will produce imaginings of all sorts of external events and concerns about one's intestinal tract.283 They will disappear completely as soon as digestion has been
completed and flatulence has ceased. The hypochondriac is a capricious fellow (a visionary) of the most pitiful sort, obstinately unable to come to grips with his imaginings,
always running to the physician, who has no end of trouble with him and who can only quiet the patient in the same way in which he [213] quiets a child (that is, with pills
containing bread crumbs instead of remedies). Moreover, when this patient, who despite his perpetual ailments never really falls ill, consults medical books, he becomes
completely insufferable because now he believes that he feels in his body all the discomforts which he has read about in the books. Extraordinary gaiety, in the form of lively wit
and happy laughter, serves as a symptom of this sick imagination to which the
* I have remarked in another writing that averting attention from certain painful sensations, and concentrating on some other object voluntarily grasped in thought can ward
off the painful sensations so completely that they are unable to break out into an illness. ["Another writing" refers to Von der Macht des GemüthsTrans.]
109
 110
patient feels occasionally subjected; thus falling victim to the ever-changing sport of his moods. Anxious fear, childish in character, of the thought of death nourishes this sickness.
But whoever does not tend to overlook these thoughts with manly courage will never enjoy life properly.
Still, on this side of the border of mental disorder is the sudden change of moods 284 (raptus), an unexpected leap from one subject to a totally different one without apparent
motivation. Occasionally the change precedes every disturbance as an indication; but frequently the mind is already so disorganized that such attacks of irregularity become the
rule. Suicide is often just the result of a raptus. Because he who, in the violence of emotion, has slit his throat will soon after patiently allow it to be sewn up again.
Melancholy (melancholia) can also be a mere delusion of misery which the low-spirited self-tormentor (inclined toward feeling wretched) creates for himself. In itself it is not yet
a mental disorder, but may easily lead to it. In other respects it is a mistaken but frequently used expression to speak of a melancholy mathematician (for example, Professor
Hausen)285 when one means only a profoundly thoughtful person.§ 51.286 The delirious talk (delirium) of a person waking in a feverous state is a physical illness and requires medical attention. Only the delirious person, in whom the physician
perceives no signs of such a sickness, is called crazy, for which the word deranged is but a mild term. Therefore, if someone has intentionally caused an accident, the question
arises, whether any or how much blame should be attached to such an afflicted person. Above all it has to be determined first whether he was crazy at that moment or not. For the
solution of this question the court of justice cannot refer him to the medical faculty but must refer him to the philosophical faculty (because of the incompetence of the court
regard110
 111
ing this question). The question of whether the accused at the time of his act was in full possession of his natural faculty of understanding [214] and judgment is a wholly
psychological question; and although physical derangement of the spirit perchance might now and then be the cause of an unnatural transgression of the moral law (which dwells
in everybody), physicians and physiologists are generally still not advanced enough to see deeply into the mechanisms inside a human being in order to determine whether the
attack caused the atrocity, or whether it could have been predicted (without anatomy of the body). Moreover, concerning the question whether the mental condition of the agent
was one of derangement or of a fixed purpose held with a sound understanding, forensic medicine (medicina forensis), is meddling with alien business which the judge knows
nothing about. He must at least refer it to another faculty as something not belonging to his competence.*
§ 52. 287 It is difficult to bring systematic classification to what is essential and incurable disorder. Moreover, it is of little use to occupy oneself with it because all methods of
cure must be fruitless and fall short of their aim since the powers of the subject cannot cooperate (as is the case with bodily ailments) and yet the goal can only be attained through
that person's own use of the understanding. Even though it can be only indirectly pragmatic and tell you what not to do, anthropol-
* Thus such a judge declared a woman insane who in despair murdered a child because she had been sentenced to the house of correction. Consequently she was exempt
from the death penalty. The judge argued that he who draws real conclusions from false premises is insane. The woman concerned had concluded that the sentence to serve
in the house of correction was an indelible loss of honor, more severe than death itself (which is quite false). So she came to the conclusion that she had earned death for
herself. The person was declared insane; and, as such she is exempted from the death penalty. On the basis of this argument it might easily be possible that all criminals be
declared insane persons whom we should pity and cure, but never punish. [The text follows the A and similar B3 versions. The "for herself" was added in BEd.]
111
 112
ogy requires at least an attempt at a general outline of this most profound degradation of humanity which seems to originate from Nature. Derangement may be classified as
tumultuous, methodical, and systematic.
1. Madness (amentia) is the inability to bring ideas into mere coherence necessary for the possibility of experience. Because [215] of their garrulity, women in the madhouses are
chiefly subject to this illness. Their vivid imagination adds so many digressions to what they are saying that no one can grasp what they are really trying to say. This first kind of
derangement is tumultuous.
2. Insanity (dementia) is that disturbance of the mind, wherein everything which the insane person relates, is in accord with the possibility of an experience, and indeed with the
formal laws of thought; but, because of falsely inventive imagination, self-concocted ideas are treated as if they were perceptions. Those who believe they are everywhere
surrounded by enemies, and those who regard all glances, words, and otherwise indifferent actions of others as directed against them personally and as traps set for them belong to
this category. These people, in their unfortunate madness, are often so acute at interpreting as directed against them what others do inadvertently, that, if the data were only true,
we would be obliged to pay the highest respect to their understanding. I have seen nobody who has ever been healed of this illness (because to be mad with reason is a peculiar
sort of predisposition). However, they are not to be counted among the asylum fools, because, being concerned only with themselves, they direct their supposed craftiness only to
their own welfare, without putting anyone else in danger. Consequently they do not need to be locked up for the sake of safety. This second kind of derangement is methodical.
3. Delirium (insania) is disordered faculty of judgment
112
 113
in which the mind is deceived by analogies, which are being confused with concepts of similar things, so that the imagination offers dissimilar objects as similar and universal
ones in a process resembling that of the understanding. Mental patients of this type are usually very cheerful; they write insipid verse and take pleasure in the richness of what, in
their opinion, is such an extensive realm of analogous concepts. The delirious person of this type cannot be cured because he is creative and entertaining through diversity, like
poetry in general. This third kind of derangement is methodical, but fragmentary only.4. Lunacy (vesania) is the sickness of a disordered reason. The patient disregards all the facts of experience and aspires to principles which can be entirely exempted from the test
of experience. Such a patient fancies that he comprehends the incomprehensible, [216] and that such things as the invention of a method for squaring the circle, perpetual motion,
the unveiling of the transcendental forces of Nature, and the comprehension of the mystery of the Trinity are all within his power. He is the quietest of all hospital patients; and,
because of his self-contained speculation, he is the farthest removed from a state of frenzy. With complete self-sufficiency, he closes his eyes to all the difficulties of
investigation. This fourth type of derangement could be labeled systematic.
There is in this last type of mental disturbance not merely disorder and departure from the laws which govern reason, but also positive unreason, that is, a different rule, a totally
dissimilar standpoint into which the soul is transported, so to speak. From such a perspective the soul looks at all objects in another way; and from the sensorio communi, 288
which is required for unity of life (of the animal), it finds itself transported to a faraway place289 (hence the word derangement or displacement). A mountainous landscape
sketched from a bird's-eye
113
 114
perspective permits a completely different judgment of the region than a sketch made from the perspective of level ground. The soul does not really feel, or see itself in another
location (for it cannot perceive itself in relation to its position in space without being contradictory, because it would otherwise look at itself as the object 290 of its outer sense,
when in itself it is capable of being an object of its inner sense only); however, in this way we explain the so-called mental dislocation as well as we possibly can. It is
astonishing, however, that the faculties of the unsettled mind still arrange themselves into a system, and that Nature even strives to bring a principle of unity into unreason, so that
the thinking faculty does not remain idle, even though it is employed, not objectively in the true cognition of things, but only subjectively for the continuation of animal functions.
But then the attempt to observe oneself by physical means, in a condition approaching derangement into which one has voluntarily placed oneself in order to observe better even
what is involuntary, shows enough reason for the investigation of the causes of phenomena. However, to conduct experiments on the mind, and even to make it ill to a certain
degree for the purpose of observing it and then to investigate its nature on the basis of findings which may have presented themselves, is dangerous. Thus, for example, after
taking a specific dose of napellus [217] (a poisonous root), Helmont291 claims to have perceived a sensation, as if he were doing his thinking in his stomach! Another physician
increased his doses of camphor little by little until it seemed to him as if everything in the street were topsy-turvy. Many have experimented on themselves with opium for so long
that they fell into a state of mental debility whenever they gave up further use of this means of artificial stimulation of thought. An artificially induced derangement could easily
become a genuine one.
114
 115
Related Remarks
§ 53. 292 The germ of derangement develops together with the germ of reproduction, and is thus hereditary. It is dangerous to marry into families where even a single such
creature has been produced. If there should have been even one deranged child in the mother's family (although the mother herself is free from the evil), regardless of how many
children a married couple may have free of this evil inheritance due, for example, to their taking after their father and his parents or grandparents, then sometime in this marriage
there will appear a child taking after the maternal line (as one can also tell from the resemblance of features) and be born with an inherited mental disorder.
People often think that they can name the accidental causes of this malady, so that it may appear not inherited but rather acquired, and that293 the unfortunate one were to blame
for it. ''Love made him crazy," people say of one; while of another they say, "Pride made him crazy," and of a third person they say, "He has studied too hard." Falling in love
with a person of high social standing and to expect from that person the folly of marriage is not the cause but the result of derangement; and as far as pride is concerned, an
insignificant person's demand that others bow and scrape before him, and the insinuation that others challenge his position presupposes mental derangement without which he
would not have dared to make such demands in the first place.
But, as to studying too hard,* there is no need to warn young people. With regard to studying, youth needs [218] spurs, rather than reins. Even the strongest
* It is an ordinary thing to see a merchant overextend himself and dissipate his powers in vast schemes. Anxious parents, however, have nothing to fear from overtaxing
the industriousness of young people (as long as their minds are otherwise sound). [218] A student is protected by Nature from such overloading with knowledge by finding
subjects distasteful, over which he only broods and breaks his head to no avail.
115
 116
and most persistent effort on this score can only weary the mind, so that a man becomes averse to knowledge; but such an effort cannot put the mind out of sorts, unless it wasalready confused from the beginning and therefore took delight in mystical books and revelations transcending ordinary human understanding. Also in this area belongs the
inclination to devote oneself to the reading of books which have received a certain holy unction, merely for the sake of the printed word and without concern for the moral import.
To describe this, a certain author has hit upon the expression, "He is scripture-crazy."
I have doubts whether there is a distinction between general lunacy (delirium generale) and that which is fixed upon a definite object (delirium circa objectum). Unreason (which
is something positive and not just a lack of reason) is like reason, a mere form to which objects can be adapted; and both reason and unreason, therefore, concern themselves with
the general. However, what first comes into the mind at the (usually sudden) outbreak of a crazy disposition (the accidentally encountered subject matter about which the person
will rave later) will be from then on the insane person's chief concern, since it is, because of the novelty of the impression, more firmly fixed in his mind than anything else
occurring afterward.
One also says of a person in whose head something has gone wrong: "He has crossed the line," just as if a man, who crosses the equator for the first time were in danger of losing
his understanding. 294 But this is only misunderstanding. It only means to say that the dandy who, suddenly and without taking any great pains, hopes to get rich by taking a trip
to India, draws up his plan, like a fool, from the beginning. While he pursues his scheme, the incipient folly grows and, upon his return, even if fortune has been kind to him, it
shows itself fully grown.
The one who talks aloud to himself and the one who is caught gesticulating to himself in his room, falls under the suspicion that something is not right in his head.
116
 117
[219] This is especially the case if he believes that he is blessed or haunted and in conversation and in relation with higher beings. However, it is not the case when he does not
consider or does not even wish himself to be chosen for such revelations, while conceding that other holy men might be capable of supersensory intuition.
The only general characteristic of insanity is the loss of a sense for ideas that are common to all (sensus communis), and its replacement with a sense for ideas peculiar to
ourselves (sensus privatus); for example, in broad daylight a man sees a light burning on a table, which, however, another person standing next to him does not see; or he hears a
voice which no one else hears. It is a subjectively necessary touchstone of the correctness of our judgment and, consequently, of the soundness of our understanding that we relate
our understanding to the understanding of others, and not merely isolate ourselves within our own experiences, and make public quasi judgments which are merely based on our
own private ideas. Therefore, the prohibition of books only on the basis of theoretical opinions is an insult to mankind (especially when they have no influence on legal matters).
In this way we are deprived not of the only but still of the greatest and most useful means of correcting our own thoughts. We are used to making public statements in order to see
whether they also agree with the understanding of others. Otherwise, something merely subjective (for example, habit or inclination) would easily be taken for something
objective. It is in just this that illusion consists, something which is said to be deceptive, or rather something whereby one is misled into self-deception in the application of a rule.
He who does not bother about this touchstone, but gets it into his head to acknowledge his own private opinion as already valid without regard for, or even against, common
opinion, has submitted to a play of thoughts in which he proceeds and judges in a world not shared with other people, but rather (as in a dream) he sees himself in his own little
117
 118
world. Sometimes it is only the terminology, with which an otherwise clearheaded man wishes to communicate his perceptions to others, that does not seem to accord with the
principle of common sense. Such a person usually sticks to his opinion, like Harrington, 295 the gifted author of Oceana, who had the whim that his transpiration (effluvia) jumped
from his skin in the form of flies. However, this could well have been electrical effects on a body overcharged with this matter, an experience which somebody [220] claims to
have had before. Harrington perhaps desired to point out only the similarity to a feeling of jumping off, rather than actually seeing these flies.
Derangement accompanied by raging (rabies), that is, an affection of anger (toward a real or imaginary object) which renders one insensitive to all external stimuli, is only one
variety of mental imbalance. It often seems to look more frightening than it is in its consequences and it is, like a paroxysm in an acute illness, not so much rooted in the mind as
rather caused by material factors. It can often be removed by a physician with a dose of medicine.296
On the Talents of the Cognitive Faculty
§ 54.297 By talent (natural gift) we understand that quality of the cognitive faculty which depends not on education but on the natural ability of the subject. These talents are
productive intelligence (ingenium strictus sive materialiter dictum), sagacity,298 and originality of thought (genius).
Intelligence is either comparative (ingenium comparans), or argumentative (ingenium argutans). Intelligence unites (assimilates) heterogeneous ideas, which often, according to
the law of the imagination (that is, association), lie apart from each other. It is a peculiar faculty of
118 119
classifying, which belongs to the understanding (as the faculty of recognizing the general) in so far as the understanding attributes objects to a certain class. Intelligence
subsequently requires the application of the power of judgment in order to determine the particular and the general, and to use the thinking faculty for the purpose of gaining
knowledge. To be intelligent (in reading or writing) is something that cannot be learned through the mechanism of schooling and its discipline. Rather, it belongs, as a distinct
talent, to the liberality of disposition in the mutual exchange of ideas (veniam damus petimusque vicissim). 299 Intelligence is a characteristic of the understanding which is hard to
explain. It is like a favor given to you which contrasts with the strictness of judgment (judicium discretivum) in the application of the general to the particular (that is, of the
concepts of class to those of the species), which not only hampers the faculty of assimilation, but also the inclination to use this faculty.300
[221] On the Specific Differences between the Comparative and the Argumentative Intelligence
A. On Productive Intelligence
§ 55.301 It is pleasing, generally accepted, and encouraging to find similarities amidst dissimilar objects; and so the intelligence provides material for the understanding to make
its knowledge more general. On the other hand, though judgment, which qualifies concepts and contributes more to their correction than to their extension, is indeed praised and
recommended, it is nevertheless sober, exacting, and, as regards freedom of thought, restricting; and just for this reason it is unpopular. The activity of the comparative intelligence
is rather like play; while that of the judgment is more like business. Intelligence is primarily a flower of
119
 120
youth, judgment a ripe fruit of old age. He who unites both to a high degree in a product of the mind is perspicacious (perspicax).
Intelligence 302 snatches at sudden ideas; judgment strives toward insight. Deliberation is a burgomaster' s virtue (to protect and govern the city by given laws, under the superior
command of the castle). In the other hand, Buffon,303 the great author of a system of nature, was considered bold (hardi) by his fellow-citizens for ignoring the deliberations of
judgment, even though his daring enterprise appears rather lacking in modesty (frivolity). Intelligence usually prefers the appetizer, whereas judgment usually prefers the main
course. The hunt for witty remarks (bons mots), such as the Abbé Trublet's304 richly exemplifies, the kind that stretches intelligence upon the rack, makes shallow minds or turns
a conscientious man away in disgust. Intelligence is inventive when it comes to fashions, that is, assumed rules of behavior, which are pleasing only because of their novelty, and
which must be exchanged, before they become customary, for other forms which are just as transitory.
Intelligence in punning is stale; while needless subtlety (micrology) of judgment is pedantic. Humorous intelligence arises from directing the head to appreciate paradoxes, in
which the (sly) knave peers from behind the naïve sound of simplicity in order to subject somebody (or even his own opinion) to laughter. [222] Heaping the very opposite of
what is worthy of applause with obvious praise (persiflage) and making the contemptible through contrast even more contemptible is very rousing through the surprise at the
unexpected, for example, as Swift's "Art of Sinking in Poetry,"305 or Butler's Hudibras.306 Such a type of intelligence, however, is always just a pastime and light bantering (like
Voltaire's). On the other hand, the person who clothes true and important principles in a disguise (like Young in his satires),307 can well be called a heavy hundredweight as to
intelligence,
120
 121
because this is a serious occupation which calls forth more admiration than amusement.
A proverb (proverbium) is not properly called a witty remark (bon mot), because it is a commonly accepted form of expressing a thought, which is to be propagated by imitation,
even though it may well have been a witticism in the mouth of the first speaker. Speaking in proverbial clichés is therefore the speech of the populace and indicates complete loss
of intelligence in the relation with the refined world.
Profundity is certainly not an affair of cleverness. 308 But so far as cleverness, through the figurative element which it adds to thoughts, can be a vehicle or a garment for reason,
and its management of morally practical ideas, it can be thought of as profound cleverness (in contrast to the superficial one). For example, take one of those so-called wonderful
aphorisms of Samuel Johnson about women, which is quoted in Waller's biography: "Doubtless he praised many women whom he would have hesitated to marry, and perhaps he
married one he would have been ashamed to praise."309 Here the whole element of wonder resides in the play of antithesis; but reason gains nothing by it. But whenever reason
encountered controversial questions, his friend Boswell could not entice from Johnson any of those oracular utterances which he sought so incessantly, not even one which would
have revealed a trace of wit. Everything he uttered about the religious sceptic, about the rights of the government, or even about human freedom, came out with a heavy
coarseness because of his natural disposition and the pampering by his flatterers. This coarseness was called rudeness* by his admirers, and it indicated his
* Boswell relates that when a certain lord in his presence expressed his sorrow that Johnson had not had a finer education, Baretti said, "No, no, my lord, you could havedone with him whatever you wanted, he would always have been a bear.' "True, but would he not have been a dancing bear?" the lord asked. A third person, one of his
friends, thought to soften this by saying, "He has nothing of the bear but his skin." [See James Boswell, Life of Samuel Johnson, ed. Crocker (New York, 1867) 1.
252Trans.]
121
 122
great 310 [223] inability to combine cleverness and thought in a profound way. Also, men of influence, who paid no attention to his friends who recommended him as an
extraordinarily qualified member for parliament, seem to have valued his talent highly. Intelligence, sufficient for the composition of a dictionary of a language, is not adequate for
the inspiration and entertainment of ideas and reason necessary for the understanding of important matters. Modesty comes naturally to the mind of anyone who sees himself
called to it, and mistrust comes to his own talents when he does not want to judge for himself, but rather take the judgments of others (preferably unnoticed) into consideration.
Johnson never possessed these characteristics.
B. On Sagacity, or the Gift of Investigation
§ 56.311 To discover something (that lies hidden either in ourselves or somewhere else) requires in many instances the special talent of knowing how to search effectively.
Discovery requires a natural gift of preliminary judgment (judicium praevium) as to where the truth may indeed be found; it requires the ability to hit upon the clues, and to use
the least appearance of relevancy, in order to find or construct, what one is seeking. The logic of schoolmen teaches us nothing about this gift. But Bacon of Verulam gave us in
his Organum312 a brilliant example of method as to how the hidden characteristics of Nature could be exposed by means of experiment. But even this example fails to provide
instruction according to any definite rules as to how one should search successfully. One must always first make some supposition (begin with a hypothesis) and proceed from
there. All this has to occur according to principles, certain modes of procedure. How to find these procedures is the crucial problem. Venturing forth blindly, and trusting upon
one's good luck until one stumbles over a stone and finds a piece of ore, and
122
 123
subsequently the lode as well, is indeed bad advice for investigation. Nevertheless, there are people of talent, [224] who, so to speak, with the divining rod in hand track down the
treasures of knowledge, without ever having learned to do so; and no wonder, when they cannot teach others, they merely demonstrate how they do it, because it is a gift of
Nature.
C. On Originality of the Cognitive Faculty or Genius
§ 57. 313 To invent something is entirely different from discovering something. The thing that one discovers is assumed as already existing, only it had not yet been recognized;
for example, America existed before Columbus. But what one invents, such as gunpowder, was not known before the artist* made it. But both, invention and discovery, can be of
value. However, one may find something he was not looking for at all (like the gold assayer who found phosphorus), and then there is no merit in it whatsoever. The talent for
invention is called genius.314 But this name is attributed only to an artist, consequently to one who knows how to make something, not to him who merely stores information and
knows about many things. It is also not attributed to an artist who merely imitates, but it is attributed to one who has been inspired to create something original in his work;
finally, it is attributed to this artist only when his creation is exemplary, that is, when it is worthy to be imitated315 as an example (exemplar). Therefore, human genius is "the
exemplary originality of man's talent" with regard to this or that type of artistic product. We also call a talented mind a genius; then this word is to mean not merely a person's gift
of Nature, but the person himself
* Long before the time of the monk Schwartz, gunpowder was used in the siege of Algeciras, and its invention seems to belong to the Chinese. But it may be, however,
that some German who obtained this powder analyzed its contents (for example, by washing out the saltpeter in lye, by rinsing away the carbon, and by burning the
sulphur), and thus discovered it, although he did not invent it.
123
 124
as well. To be a genius in many departments is to be a vast genius (like Leonardo da Vinci).
The proper field for a genius is the imagination, because imagination is creative, and just because it is less subject to the coercion of rules than other faculties, it is more capable of
originality. [225] Because it always requires a student to imitate something, the mechanism of instruction is indeed detrimental to the budding of a genius as far as originality is
concerned. However, every art requires certain mechanical and basic rules like the conformity of the product with the underlying idea, that is, truth in the presentation of the object
one has in mind. This is something that must be learned through the discipline of schooling, and it is always a function of the art of imitation. But to set the imagination free fromthis constraint also, and to allow the inborn talent, even though it is contrary to its Nature, to proceed without rules and ramble about, would result perhaps in original nonsense,
which 316 would surely not be exemplary, and hence could not be counted as genius.
Spirit317 is the animating principle in a person. In the French language spirit and wit share the same term, that is, esprit; but this is different in German. We say that a speech, a
handwriting, a lady in society, and so forth, are beautiful, but without spirit. The supply of wit does not count here because we may become disgusted with it, since its effect
leaves nothing worthwhile behind. If all these above-mentioned things and persons are to be called spirited, then they must arouse our interest by means of ideas. Spirit sets the
imagination into motion and it provides such faculties with a large field of operation. Therefore, how about using the German term "inborn spirit" [eigenthümlicher Geist] to
express the French word génie? Our nation permits itself to be told that the French have in their own language a word which we do not have in ours. We are told to borrow from
them, whereas they in turn have borrowed the word genius from Latin, which means nothing else but inborn spirit.
124
 125
The cause, however, why this exemplary originality of talent is known by this mystical name, is that the man who has genius cannot explain to himself its outbursts nor how he
arrived at a skill which he never tried to learn. Invisibility (of a cause regarding an effect) is a subordinate notion of spirit (a genius which has been associated with the talented
from birth) whose inspiration it simply follows, so to speak. The mental powers, however, must operate harmoniously with the help of the imagination; otherwise they would not
inspire but would disturb each other; the harmonizing must arise from the nature of the subject; 318 [226] wherefore we can say that genius can also be described as the talent ''by
which Nature gives rules to art."
§ 58.319 For the present we may leave uninvestigated the question of whether the world on the whole is particularly served by great geniuses, because they often take new roads
and open up new vistas; or whether mechanical minds, even if they are not epoch-making, with their common and slowly advancing understanding on the crutches of experience,
have contributed most for the growth of the arts and sciences (because, even if no one is stimulated to admire them, it is true that they also cause no confusion). However, a certain
type of them, men of genius as they are called (though they might better be called apes of genius), have rallied together under the banner bearing the words "minds extraordinarily
endowed by Nature," and have declared that both painstaking study and research are amateurish and that they have laid hold of the spirit of all science in one grasp, although they
pretend to administer it in small doses, concentrated and powerful. This type, like that of the quack and charlatan, is very detrimental to progress in scientific and ethical education
when he, like the professional or dictator, dogmatizes from the chair of wisdom in the tone of conviction on matters of religion, politics, and morals, and thus knows how to
conceal the
125
 126
paltriness of his mind. What else is there to do than to laugh, and patiently pursue one's course with industry, orderliness, and clarity, without even giving such an impostor a
second look?
§ 59. 320 According to the disparity of the national character and soil, into which it was born, genius also appears to have different original seeds within itself and seems to
develop them in different ways. In the Germans, it usually reveals itself more in the roots; in the Italians, more in the leafage; in the French, more in the blossom; and in the
English, more in the fruit.
The generalistic mind (interested in all the different kinds of knowledge) is still distinguished from the genius, who is understood as the inventive mind. The generalistic mind can
be inventive about what can be learned; in fact he is a person who possesses historical knowledge of what has been done in all scientific fields; he is called a polyhistorian, like
Julius Caesar Scaliger.321 But the genius is a man not only of wide range of mind but also of intensive intellectual greatness, who is epoch-making in everything he undertakes
(like Newton and Leibniz).322 A subordinate, but still not common, type of genius is the architectonic mind that understands the methodical interrelations of all sciences and sees
how they support each other. [227] However, there is also something like gigantic erudition which is often cyclopean, because it lacks one eye, the eye of true philosophy which
puts the understanding to the purposeful use of this vast collection of historical knowledge equal to the load of a hundred camels.
Purely natural minds (élèves de la nature, autodidacti) may often be taken for geniuses because they have thought out for themselves many a thing that they could have learned
from someone else; and thus they are geniuses in something which in itself should not attract a genius' attention; just as there are many in Switzerland who are inventors as far as
the mechanical arts are con126
 127
cerned. But precocious wonder children (ingenium praecox), of an ephemeral nature, like Heinecke 323 in Lübeck, or Baratier324 in Halle, are a deviation from the rules of
Nature, they are rarities for a naturalist's showcase. Their very early maturity is a source of attention, but often also cause enough for repentance on the part of those who promotedthem in the rudiments of learning.
Since the full employment of the cognitive faculty for its own advancement, even in theoretical knowledge, ultimately stands in need of Reason, which provides the rules without
which it cannot be advanced, we can comprehend the demand which Reason makes on cognition as three questions which are directed at the three cognitive faculties: What do I
intend to do? (asks the understanding);* What is of importance? (asks the judgment); What is the result? (asks the Reason).
The ability to answer all three questions varies according to the ability of minds. The first question requires only a clear mind to understand itself; and this natural talent is quite
common after some education, particularly if one draws attention to this ability. To answer the second question properly is a greater rarity, because all sorts of ways are open to
analyze the concept in question and to propose an apparent solution of the problem. What is the only [228] exactly appropriate answer to a question (for example, in lawsuits, or at
the outset of certain plans of action designed for an identical purpose)? There is a certain talent which can make the correct choice for a given instance (judicium discretivum).
Such a talent is much desired but also very seldom at hand. The lawyer who continues citing many facts which are supposed to support his assertions, makes the decision more
difficult for the judge, since he himself is in the dark. But if the lawyer, after developing his argument, knows how to hit upon the point (for there is only one
* Intention is here to be understood only in the theoretical sense: What do I intend to maintain as true?
127
 128
point) of primary importance, then the matter is settled shortly, and the verdict of reason follows by itself.
The understanding is positive and dispels the darkness of ignorance; judgment is more negative so that errors can be avoided which result from the dim light in which objects
appear. Reason reduces the potential for errors (prejudices) and thereby safeguards the understanding through the universality of principles. Book-learning may increase
knowledge, but it does not expand the concept and insight unless reason intervenes. Book-learning, however, is still different from subtilizing, the plainly experimental use of
reason which does not employ any law of reason. If the question is whether or not I should believe in ghosts, I could subtilize about their possibility in divers ways; but reason
prohibits the superstitious assumption of their possibility without a principle of explanation firmly based on the laws of experience.
By means of the great differences between minds as to the way they look at exactly the same objects, and at each other, by means of the friction between them and the connections
between them as well as the separations, Nature produces, for analysts and thinkers, a drama of endless variety that is worth seeing. For the class of thinkers the following maxims
(which have already been mentioned as conducive to wisdom) 325 may be laid down as immutable laws: 1) think independently; 2) (in communication with people) put yourself
in thought into the place of the other person; 3) always think in harmony with your own self.
The first principle is negative (nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri), 326 it is the principle of freedom from restraint; the second principle is positive, it is that of the Liberals
who accommodate themselves to the concepts of others; [229] the third is the principle of a consistent (in the sense of logically correct) way of thinking. Anthropology can exhibit
examples of each of these three principles, and even more examples of their opposites.
128
 129
The mightiest revolution coming from inside of man is "his departure from his self-incurred tutelage." Instead of letting others think for him, while he was merely imitating or
allowing himself to be guided by others, he now dares to proceed, though still shakily, with his own feet upon the ground of experience.
129
 130
[230] Second Book 1
On the Feeling of Pleasure and Displeasure
Classification: 1) Sensuous pleasure, 2) intellectual pleasure. The first is either conceived A. by sensation (gratification), or B. by the imagination (taste); the second (that is, the
intellectual pleasure) is conceived either a. by representable concepts or b. by ideas. The opposite, displeasure, is also conceived in the same way.
On Sensuous PleasureA. On the Feeling for the Pleasant, or On Sensuous Pleasure in the Sensation of an Object
§ 60.2 Gratification is a pleasure of sensation, and whatever amuses a sense is said to be pleasant. Pain is displeasure of sensation and whatever produces it is unpleasant. They are
opposed to each other, not like gain and deficiency (+ or 0), but like gain and loss (+ and -), that is, one is not contrasted with the other merely as an opposite (contradictorie, sive
logice oppositum),3 but rather as a counterpart (contrarie sive realiter oppositum).4 The expressions for what pleases or dis130
 131
pleases, and for what lies in between, the indifferent, are too broad, because they may also refer to the intellectual, wherein they would not coincide with gratification and pain.
It is possible to explain these feelings also by the effect which the sensation of our physical condition has on the mind. [231] Whatever incites me directly (through my senses) to
abandon (to depart from) my condition is unpleasant to me, it gives me pain; and whatever drives me to maintain (to remain in) my condition is pleasant to me, it gratifies me. But
we are incessantly moved by the stream of time, and the change of sensations resultant from it. Even if the abandonment of one instant, and the occurring of another, is one and
the same act (of change), it is, nevertheless, in our thought and in our awareness of change, a temporal sequence conforming to the relation of cause and effect. Now the question
arises whether the awareness of leaving the present state, or the prospect of entering a future state, awakens in us the sensation of gratification. In the first instance the
gratification is nothing more than ending the pain and therefore something negative; whereas in the second instance the presentiment of pleasantness, that is an expected
intensification of the state of pleasure, would be something positive. It can, however, already be conjectured, that the former will take place in any case since time drags us from
the present to the future (not the other way round), and that we are compelled at first to depart from the present, without any certainty into which other state we shall enter. We are
only certain that it will be a different one which in itself can be the cause of a pleasant feeling.
Gratification is the feeling of advancement; pain is that of a hindrance of life. But the life (of the animal) is, as physicians have also noticed, a continuing play of the antagonism
between these two feelings.
Therefore pain must precede every gratification; pain always comes first. What else but a quick death from
131
 132
joy would follow a steady advancement of vitality, which cannot be increased beyond a certain point anyway?
Also, no gratification can immediately follow another; but between one and another there must occur pain. Actually small checks on our vital power, with interspersed
advancements, constitute the state of health which we erroneously take for a continuously felt condition of well-being, since it always consists only of erratic sequences of
pleasant feelings (constantly interspersed with pain). Pain is the incentive to activity, and, above all, in activity we feel that we are alive; without such a good, inertia would set in.
[232] Pain, which disappears slowly (like the gradual recovery from an illness or the slow reacquisition of lost capital), is not followed by strong gratification, because the
transition is not noticed. I subscribe with full conviction to these maxims of Count Veri. 5
Elucidation through Examples
Why is a game (especially for money) so attractive, and, if it is not too self-serving, why is it the best distraction and recreation after long and exhausting thought? One can
recuperate only slowly by remaining idle. A game is a state of incessant movement between fearing and hoping. After a game the evening meal tastes better and agrees with us
better. Why are dramas (whether tragedies or comedies) so alluring? Because all entertain certain complications, fears, and dilemmas between hope and joy, and because the play
of opposing emotions at the end provides the spectator with an enhancement of life by stirring him inwardly. Why does a love-novel end with a wedding; and why is a sequel (to
Fielding's novel) written by a clumsy amateur so repugnant and in bad taste when he continues the story into the married life of the couple? Jealousy before marriage, like the
anguish of
132
 133
the lovers between their joys and hopes, is spice for the reader, while in marriage it is poison, because, to use the language of such a novel, "the end of love's grief, is also the end
of love" (understood, of course, as love with passion). Why is work the best way of enjoying life? Because it is a troublesome occupation (unpleasant in itself and delightful only
in its success), so that relaxation, through the mere disappearance of a long hardship, turns into sensible pleasure, that is, cheerfulness, because otherwise there would not be
anything enjoyable. Tobacco (whether smoked or snuffed) is initially linked with an unpleasant sensation. But just because nature instantaneously does away with the pain (by
secretion of mucus at the palate or in the nose), tobacco (especially when smoked) becomes a sort of companion who entertains and constantly stimulates sensations and eventhoughts, though they are only of the roaming kind. Finally, the one who is not induced to activity by any positive pain will always be affected by a negative one, namely [233]
boredom, perceived as a form of emptiness of sensation by the person accustomed to change of sensations. In trying to fill his life with something such a person will often feel
compelled to do something harmful to himself rather than do nothing at all. 6
On Boredom and Amusement
§ 61.7 To feel one's life, to enjoy oneself, is then nothing else but to feel constantly impelled to pass beyond the present state (which, consequently, has also to be a frequently
recurring grief). This also explains the oppressive, distressing difficulty of boredom for all persons who are mindful of their life and their time (cultivated people).* This stimulus
or impulse
* Because of his inborn dullness the Carib [see sec. 35, n. 198Trans.] is free from this difficulty. He can sit for hours with his fishing rod without catching anything; his
want of thought is caused by a lack of incentive activity, which always brings grief with it and is therefore dismissed. Our
(footnote continued on the next page)
133
 134
to forsake every point of time in which we find ourselves, and to pass over into the next moment, has accelerating characteristics and may turn into the determination to put an end
to one's life. The luxurious person has experimented with pleasures of every kind, and no pleasure is new to him any longer; just as people in Paris said of Lord Mordaunt: "The
English hang themselves in order to while their time away." 8 The dearth of sensations perceived in oneself produces a dread (horror vacui), and, as it were, the presentiment of a
slow death is regarded as more agonizing than when fate suddenly cuts the thread of life.
This also explains why pastimes are equaled with entertainment because the quicker we can make time pass, the more we feel ourselves refreshed. Among friends who have talked
for three hours while taking a pleasure ride in a carriage, one will at the end look at his watch and ask [234] "Where did all that time go?" or say, "How short the time has been for
us." We would regret the loss of time very little if the attention to time would be a pleasure and not so much directed to the attention to pain which we strive to leave behind us.
Conversations which have little exchange of ideas are called tedious, and just because of this tiresome; and an entertaining man may not be considered important but nevertheless
pleasant. As soon as he steps into the room, the face of every guest lights up, like the joyfulness resulting from being relieved of a burden.
But how do we explain the phenomenon that a person complains at the end of his days about the brevity of life, when he had been so tormented with boredom most of his life that
every day appeared very long to him.
(footnote continued from the previous page)
world of readers of refined taste is always sustained by the appetite and even the ravenous hunger for reading (a type of idleness) ephemeral literature. Such reading is done
not for the sake of self-cultivation, but rather for enjoyment; so that readers' heads always stay empty, and there is no fear of overeating, because they give to their busy
idleness the aspect of work, and pretend to themselves a meritorious use of time, which is in no way better than what the Journal des Luxus und der Moden offers to the
public.
134
 135
The cause is to be sought in analogy to a similar observation: Why do German miles (not measured or indicated by milestones, like the Russian versts) become ever shorter the
nearer we come to the capital (such as Berlin), and become longer, the farther we are away from the capital (as in Pomerania)? The large number of objects seen (villages and
farmhouses) leaves the memory with the deceptive conclusion that a vast amount of space has been covered and, consequently, that a longer period of time has passed. The open
space 9 in the latter instance produces less recollection of what has been seen, and therefore it is concluded that the journey has been shorter, and that the time also has been
shorter than would be shown by the clock. Just as the great number of periods lived through, which characterize the last part of life with numerous and varying tasks already
performed, will arouse in an old person the imagination of a longer lived life, than he would think according to the number of years. Filling one's time with harmoniously
progressive activities, which have an important and intended purpose in view (vitam extendere factis),10 is the only certain means of becoming happy with one's life and at the
same time feeling satisfactorily experienced. ''The more you have thought, and the more you have done, the longer you have lived (even in your own fancy)." The conclusion of
such a life would occur with contentment.
But what about contentment (acquiescentia) during life? It is not attainable for mankind, neither in the moral aspect (to be content with oneself and one's good conduct), nor in the
pragmatic [235] aspect (as to one's well-being which he intends to acquire through skill and cleverness). Nature has given man pain as a goad to activity. Man cannot escape from
this goad; he needs it so that he can always progress to what is better. Even in the last moments of life, contentment with the last period lived through can be called only
comparative (partly because we compare ourselves with the lot of others, and partly because we compare ourselves with ourselves).135
 136
Contentment is, however, never pure and 11 complete. To be (absolutely) contented with life would mean inactive rest, the cessation of all motivation, or the dulling of12
sensations and associated activities. Such a state of inactivity can not prevail over the intellectual life of man because death would follow inevitably, as at the stopping of the heart
in an animal's body, unless a new stimulus (through pain) is forthcoming.
Note. In this section we also ought to consider the emotional excitement as a feeling of pleasure and displeasure, which transgresses the limits of man's inner freedom. But since it
is frequently confused with the passions, which will be discussed in another section, that is, the one on the faculty of desire,13 and since it is really closely related to desires, I
shall address myself to the emotional excitement at the proper time in the third section.
§ 62.14 Being joyously disposed is usually a temperamental trait, but it may also be a result of principles like Epicurus's principle of feeling happy, so-called by others and
accordingly decried, which actually was intended to mean the ever joyful heart of a wise person. Even-tempered is he who neither rejoices nor frets; he is very different from the
one who does not care about the events of life because the latter's feeling has become dull. Different from equanimity is the ill-humored disposition (which may at first have been
called lunatic disposition). It signifies a person's tendency to have fits of joy or sadness for which no apparent reason can be given by the afflicted. It is a characteristic especially
common with hypochondriacs. This disposition is entirely different from the playful talent (of Butler or Sterne),15 with which the witty person gives, with roguish simplicity, the
audience or the reader an opportunity to rearrange on their own those objects which have intentionally been misplaced (by standing them on
136
 137
their heads, so to speak). Sensitivity is not opposed to equanimity, because it is a faculty [236] and a power which either permits the states of pleasure or displeasure, or even
keeps them from being felt. Sensitivity is accompanied by a choice. Sentimentality, on the other hand, is a weakness because of its interest in the condition of others who could
play the sentimentalist at will, and even affect that person against his will. Sensitivity is masculine because the man who wants to spare his wife or children from hardship or grief
must possess such delicate feeling as is necessary to make others judge their sensation not by his own strength but rather by their weakness. The delicacy of his sensation is
necessary for generosity. On the other hand, the hypocritical extension of one's feelings in order to appear sympathetically in tune with the feelings of others, thus allowing oneself
to remain passive, is silly and childish. There can and should be piety with good humor; difficult but necessary work can and ought to be performed with good humor; indeed one
can and should even die with good humor, since all this loses its value when it is done or endured in a bad humor and 16 sullen temper.
Concerning grief which one broods over intentionally as a grief which is never to end except with life itself, it is said that someone has something weighing on his mind (some
trouble). However, one does not have to have something weighing on one's mind, since what cannot be changed must be dismissed from the mind. It would be nonsensical
wanting to make what has happened into what has not happened. To better oneself17 is good and it is also a duty, but wishing to better what is already beyond one's power is
absurd. On the other hand, taking something to heart, which means accepting good advice and instruction with good intentions, is the deliberate determination to supply one's will
with a sufficiently strong feeling for carrying it out. The penitence of the self-tormentor, who should quickly apply his disposition toward finding a better way of life, is simply a
lost
137
 138
labor. And it has, in addition, the bad consequence that he regards his guilt as thereby erased (simply through remorse) so that he does not have to subject himself to striving for
the better, which under reasonable circumstances should now have been doubled.
§ 63. 18 One kind of self-gratification also brings cultivation with it. It increases the faculty of enjoying more gratification of this sort, and applies to the sciences and the fine arts.
Another kind of self-gratification, however, is overindulgence, which makes us less and less susceptible [237] to further enjoyment. Upon whichever course one may seek
gratification, it is a principal maxim, as has already been stated above,19 for someone to indulge only so far that he could still go further, since being completely satisfied causes
that disgusting state which makes life a burden for the spoiled person who has everything, and which consumes women with so-called vapors. Young man! (I repeat)20 be fond of
your work; deny yourself pleasures, not for the sake of denying, but rather in order to keep them always in view as far as possible! Do not dull your capacity for receptivity by
indulging yourself prematurely! The maturity of old age, which never makes you regret the loss of a single physical pleasure, will assure, even in this sacrifice, a store of
contentment which is independent of chance as well as the laws of Nature.
§ 64.21 However, we also judge pleasure and sorrow by a higher satisfaction or dissatisfaction within ourselves (namely, the moral). We have to decide whether we ought to
refrain or indulge.1. The object may be pleasant; but the pleasure we take in it may be dissatisfying. Therefore we have the expression "a bitter joy." A person who is in precarious circumstances
and then inherits the estate of his parents or other worthy and generous relatives, cannot avoid rejoicing
138
 139
over their death, though he also cannot keep from reproaching himself for his joy. This is exactly what takes place in the mind of a colleague who attends, with sincere sadness,
the funeral of his honored predecessor.
2. The object may be unpleasant, but grieving about it may be pleasing. Therefore we have the expression, "sweet sorrow," for example, of a surviving widow who is otherwise
very well off, but who will not allow herself to be comforted; this is something which is often improperly explained as affectation.
On the other hand, pleasure may also provide satisfaction when a person finds pleasure in such objects which provide honor to him through his occupation with them, for example,
devoting oneself to the fine arts rather than to mere sensual enjoyment; thus he has the added satisfaction that he (as a refined person) is capable of such pleasures. Likewise, the
sorrow of a person can also be dissatisfying to him. The hate of an insulted person is pain; and, even after satisfaction, the high-minded person cannot refrain from reproaching
himself with the fact that he still continues to bear a grudge against the offender.
[238] § 65. 22 Pleasure which someone (lawfully) acquires himself23 is doubly felt, first as a prize, and then also as merit (the inner awareness of being the author himself).
Money gained by working is gratifying; at least for a longer time than money won in games of chance. Even if one disregards the general harmfulness of the lottery, there remains,
nevertheless, something which a high-minded man must be ashamed of if he should win by this means. An evil for which an external cause is to blame is a source of grief; but an
evil for which oneself is to blame saddens and depresses.
But how is it to be justified that in the case of an evil which one person has suffered from another, two kinds
139
 140
of explanation are given? Thus, for example, one sufferer says: "I would be satisfied if I were in the least to blame for it." But a second sufferer says: "It is consolation to me that I
am completely innocent in this case." Innocent suffering is irritating since it is an insult inflicted by another person. Guilty suffering depresses because it is a reproach from inside.
One can easily see that of the two the second is the better person.
§ 66. 24 It is surely not the loveliest trait of man to increase his pleasure by comparing his own state with the sorrow of others, while their own sorrow is diminished by
comparison with similar of even greater sufferings of others. This effect, however, is merely psychological (according to the law of contrasts: opposita juxta se posita magis
elucescunt)25 and has no moral implications like wishing suffering on others so that one may feel the comfort of one's own state all the more intensely. By means of the
imagination one sympathizes with others (for example, when one sees a person who has lost his balance and is ready to fall, one involuntarily and vainly leans toward the opposite
side in order to place him back into balance again); and one is only happy about not being in the same situation.* Similarly, the masses run with greater26 desire to look at the
public exhibition and execution of a criminal, than to the performance of a play. The emotions and feelings, which are expressed on the victim's face [239] and in his bearing, have
a sympathetic effect on the spectator. Such emotions, through
* Suave mari [A: Dulci, mariEd.] magno, turbantibus aequora ventis,
E terra alterius magnum spectare laborem;
Non quia vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas
Sed quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suave est.
Lucretius
[It is sweet, when the winds disturb the waters on the vast deep, to behold from the land the great distress of another; not because it is a joyous pleasure that any one should bemade-to-suffer, but because it is agreeable to see from what evils thou thyself art free. De Rerum Natura 2. 14, trans. Watson (London, 1851).]
140
 141
the imagination (heightened by the solemnity of the affair), cause the spectator to be uneasy, but also leave behind a gentle but genuine feeling of exhaustion, which makes the
subsequent enjoyment of life even more pleasurable.
Also, if one compares one's own grief with other possible griefs of one's own, it becomes thereby more tolerable. The misfortune of someone who has broken his leg may be mademore bearable if he is shown that he might easily have broken his neck.
The most basic and easiest means of alleviating all grief is the thought, which one can well expect a reasonable person to have, that life itself and the enjoyment of it, so far as it
depends upon circumstances, has no value of its own; what alone has value is the use to which life is put and the end to which it is directed. The value of life has to be created by
man, it cannot be obtained through luck but only through wisdom. He who is anxiously concerned over losing his life will never enjoy life.
B. On the Feeling for the Beautiful, i.e., On the Partly Sensuous, Partly Intellectual Pleasure in the Reflective Perception, or On Taste 27
§ 67.28 Taste, in the proper sense of the word, is, as has already been stated above,29 the property of an organ (the tongue, the palate, and the gullet) to be specifically affected by
certain dissolved matter in food or drink. According to its use it is to be understood either as a differentiating taste alone or, at the same time, as a pleasant taste (for example,
whether something is sweet or bitter, or whether what is tasted [sweet or bitter] is pleasant). Distinguishing taste can provide universal agreement as to how certain things are to be
labeled, but pleasant taste can never yield a universally valid judgment: namely, that something (for example, something bitter) which is pleasant to me will also be
141
 142
pleasant to everybody. The reason for this is clear because neither pleasure nor displeasure belong to the cognitive faculty concerning objects; they are rather determinations [240]
of the subject which, therefore, cannot be attributed to external objects. Pleasant taste also contains the concept of a distinction between satisfaction and dissatisfaction, which I
relate to the idea of the object in the perception or imagination.
The word taste is, however, also used for a sensory faculty of judgment, which is not merely to choose for myself, according to my own sense perception, but also according to a
certain rule believed to be valid for everybody. 30 This rule may be empirical, in which case, however, it can neither lay any claim to true universality, nor, consequently, to
necessity (because the judgment of everyone else about pleasant taste would have to agree with my own). This kind of rule is illustrated by the habits of taste which apply to
meals. The Germans begin with a soup, whereas the English begin with solid food, because a custom, gradually extended by imitation, has turned into a rule as to the sequence of
courses.
There is also a pleasant taste whose rule must be established a priori, because it indicates with necessity, hence it is valid for everybody, how the idea of an object is to be judged
in relation to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure (where, consequently, reason is secretly at play, although one cannot derive its judgment from principles of reason, and
demonstrate it accordingly). One could classify this taste as a rationalizing taste in distinction to the empirical as the sensuous taste, (the former being the gustus reflectens,31 the
other gustus reflexus).
Every tasteful reference to oneself or one's own skills presupposes a social intention (to express oneself), which is not always sociable (sharing in the pleasure of others), but
initially usually barbaric, unsociable, and merely competitive. No one in complete solitude will dress up32 and sweep out his house; he will not even do it for his own wife and
children, but only for a guest, in
142
 143
order to present himself in a favorable light. In taste (discrimination), however, that is, in aesthetic judgment, it is not directly the sensation (the material of the idea of an object),
but rather how the free (productive) imagination combines it through its creativity, that is, the form, which produces satisfaction in an object. 33 Only the form is capable of
stating34 [241] a general rule for the feeling of pleasure. One need not expect such a general rule from sense perception which may vary greatly according to the different sensecapacity of subjects. One may therefore explain taste as follows: "Taste is the faculty of aesthetic judgment which makes universally valid discriminations."35
Taste is, therefore, a faculty of the social judgment of external objects within the imagination. Here the mind feels its freedom in the play of images (therefore of sensibility), since
sociability with other people presupposes freedom; and this feeling is pleasure. But the universal validity of this pleasure for everyone, whereby discrimination (of the beautiful)
with taste is distinguished from discrimination through mere sense perception (of what is only subjectively pleasing), that is, of what is agreeable, contains the concept of a law
within itself, because only in accordance with this law can the validity of satisfaction be universal for the person who makes the judgment. The faculty of perceiving the universal,
however, is the understanding. Thus, the judgment of taste is just as much an aesthetic judgment as it is a judgment of the understanding; but they are both in combination, (and
therefore the latter is not considered to be pure). The judging of an object through taste is a judgment about the harmony or discord concerning the freedom of play between
imagination and the law-abiding character of the understanding, and, therefore, applies only to the form of judging aesthetically (the compatibility of the sense perceptions), and
not to the generation of products in which the form is perceived. It would otherwise apply to the genius whose passionate
143
 144vitality often needs to be moderated and limited by the propriety of taste.
The beautiful alone is that which appertains to taste; the sublime, however, appertains also to the aesthetic judgment, but not to taste. But the idea of the sublime can and should be
beautiful in itself; otherwise it would be crude, barbaric, and contrary to taste. Even the portrayal of the evil or ugly (for example, in the figure of the personified Death in Milton)
can and must be beautiful whenever an object is to be aesthetically imagined, 36 even if a Thersites37 were to be portrayed. Otherwise the portrayal would arouse either distaste
or disgust which both involve an endeavor to reject an idea that has been offered for enjoyment; whereas the beautiful contains in itself the concept of the invitation to the most
intimate union with the object, that is, to immediate enjoyment. [242] With the expression of a "beautiful soul" one says all that can be said about the purpose of the innermost
union with the beautiful. Greatness of soul and strength of soul relate to the matter (the tools for certain purposes); but goodness of soul,38 the pure form under which all purposes
must be united, is therefore, wherever it is encountered, similar to Eros in the world of myth, archetypically creative and also supernatural. Such goodness of soul is still the focal
point around which the judgment of taste assembles all its judgments of sensuous pleasure as long as they are compatible with the freedom of the understanding.
Note. How might it have happened that the modern languages particularly have chosen to name the aesthetic faculty of judgment with an expression (gustus, sapor) which merely
refers to a certain sense-organ (the inside of the mouth), and that the discrimination as well as the choice of palatable things is determined by it? There is no situation in which
sensibility and understanding, united in enjoyment, can be as long continued and as often repeated with satisfaction as a good meal in good
144
 145
company. The sensibility, however, is regarded in this case only as a vehicle of conversation for the understanding. The aesthetic taste of the host manifests itself in his ability to
make a universally acceptable selection, something which he cannot accomplish completely with his own sense of taste, because his guests might perhaps wish to choose other
foods or drinks, each according to his own private sense. Consequently, the host makes his decisions with the tastes of his guests in mind, so that everyone finds something to his
own liking; such a procedure yields a comparatively universal validity. His skill in choosing guests who can engage themselves in mutual and general conversation (which is
indeed also called taste, but in reality it is reason applied to taste, and yet is distinct from taste), cannot enter into the present question. And so the feeling of an organ through a
particular sense has been able to yield the name for an ideal feeling, a feeling for a sensory, universally valid choice in general. It is even more strange that the skill to test by
sense whether something is an object of enjoyment for one and the same subject (not whether the choice of it is universally valid) (sapor) has even been exaggerated to designate
wisdom (sapientia). Perhaps the reason for this is that an unconditional, necessary purpose requires neither deliberation nor experiment, [243] but comes to mind immediately by,
so to speak, the tasting of what is wholesome.
§ 68. 39 The sublime (sublime) is awe-inspiring magnitude (magnitudo reverenda) as to extent or degree which invites approach (in order to test how far one measures up to it);
but the fear of diminishing one's own estimation through the comparison with it is at the same time acting as a deterrent (for example, thunder over our heads, or a high, wild
mountain). In this connection, if one feels confident enough and tries to collect one's powers to comprehend the phenomenon, and if then, one begins to fear that one cannot
measure up to its
145
 146
grandeur, a feeling of astonishment is aroused (a pleasant feeling through the continual overcoming of pain).
The sublime is the counterpoise, but not the reflection of the beautiful; because the effort and attempt to elevate oneself to a grasping (apprehensio) of the object awakens in the
subject a feeling of his own magnitude and strength; but the idea of the sublime in thought by description or presentation can and must always be beautiful. Otherwise veneration
becomes repugnance which differs greatly from admiration as an act of judgment, whereby one cannot satisfy one's own veneration.
Magnitude, which runs contrary to the purpose (magnitudo monstrosa), is the monstrous. Writers, therefore, who wanted to extol the vast extent of the Russian Empire, have
missed the mark in designating it as monstrous because there is a reproach involved which implies that Russia was too huge for a single ruler. A person is adventurous who has the
inclination to involve himself in events whose true account resembles a novel.
The sublime, therefore, is not an object of taste, but a feeling of emotion; however, the artistic presentation of the sublime in description and embellishment (in secondary works,
parerga) may be and ought to be beautiful, since otherwise it would be wild, crude, and repulsive, and, consequently, contrary to taste.
[244] Taste Contains a Tendency toward External Advancement of Morality
§ 69. 40 Taste (as a formal sense) concerns the communication of one's feeling of pleasure or displeasure to somone else. It includes a susceptibility, which through this
communication affects others with the pleasure of sharing a satisfaction (complacentia) with other persons (that is, sociably). Satisfaction must be considered as generally valid not
only for the experiencing subject, but also for anybody else, because it must contain necessity (of satisfaction) and, so that it can be so146
 147
recognized, an a priori principle of necessity. Satisfaction means contentment with the agreement between the pleasure of the subject and the feeling of any other person according
to a general law which has to result from the general mental constitution of the feeling person, consequently from reason. This means that the choice of such satisfaction is
subject, according to form, to the principle of duty. Therefore the ideal taste has a tendency toward the external advancement of morality. Training a person to become wellmannered for his own social position will not mean as much as educating him to be morally good; but, nevertheless, the effort prepares him to please (to be liked or admired by)
others in his social position. In this way one could call taste morality in external appearance; even though such an expression, understood literally, contains a contradiction
because being well-mannered already has the appearance or demeanor of morality, and even though it contains a certain degree of it, namely, the inclination 41 to ascribe value
even to the appearance of good manners.
§ 70.42 To be well-mannered, proper, polite, and polished (by disposing of rudeness) is, nevertheless, only the negative condition of taste. The representation of these qualities in
the imagination can be a tasteful, externally intuitive way of imagining an object, or one's own person, but for two senses only, hearing and sight. Music and plastic art (painting,
sculpture, architecture, and gardening) lay claim to taste as a susceptibility of a feeling of pleasure for the mere forms of outer perception, the former in respect to hearing, the
latter in respect to sight. On the other hand, [245] the discursive way of imagining through the spoken or written word embraces two arts wherein taste can manifest itself: rhetoric
and poetry.
147
 148
Anthropological Observations Concerning Taste
A. On Taste in Fashions
§ 71. 43 It is a natural inclination of man44 to compare his behavior to that of a more important person (the child compares itself to grown-ups, and the lowly compares himself to
the aristocrat) in order to imitate the other person's ways. A law of such imitation, which aims at not appearing less important than others, especially when no regard is paid to
gaining any profit from it, is called fashion. Therefore it belongs under the title of vanity, because in its intention there is no inner value; at the same time, it belongs also under the
title of folly, because in fashion there is still a compulsion to subject oneself slavishly to the mere example which many in society project to us. To be in fashion is a matter of
taste; he who clings to custom which is out of fashion is said to be old-fashioned; and he who even attributes value to being out of fashion is an odd person. But it is always
better, nevertheless, to be a fool in fashion than a fool out of fashion, if one chooses to brand this vanity at all with such a hard name, a title which the mania for fashion really
deserves whenever it sacrifices true uses or even duties to such vanity. All fashions are, by their very concept, mutable ways of living. Whenever the play of imitating becomes
fixed, imitation becomes usage, and that means the end of taste. Novelty makes fashion alluring; and to be inventive in all sorts of external forms, even if they often degenerate
into something fantastic and even detestable, belongs to the style of courtiers, especially the ladies, whom others then follow avidly. Those in low social positions burden
themselves with these fashions long after the courtiers have put them aside. Therefore, fashion is not properly a matter of taste (for it may be extremely antagonistic to taste), but a
matter of mere vanity in order to appear distinguished,
148
 149
and a matter of competition in order to surpass others in it. (The élégants de la cour, otherwise called petits maîtres, are windbags.)
Something splendid and sublime which is at the same time beautiful, can be combined with true, [246] ideal taste (like a splendid starry heaven, or, if it does not sound too out of
place, a St. Peter's Church in Rome). Even pomp, an ostentatious exhibition for the sake of show, can be combined with taste; but not without objection by taste, because pomp is
intended for a great mass of people, including much rabble, whose taste, being dull, calls more for the stimulation of the senses than the capacity of judgment.
B. On Artistic Taste
I shall now consider only the speaking arts, rhetoric and poetry, because they are aimed at a mood whereby the mind is directly aroused to activity. They have their place in a
pragmatic anthropology in which one seeks to know Man from the point of view of what can be made of him.
The mental principle that animates by means of ideas is called spirit. Taste is a mere regulative faculty which judges form as to the uniting of the manifold in the imagination.
Spirit, however, is the productive faculty of Reason, which supplies a pattern (a priori) for that form before the imagination is applied. Consider spirit and taste: spirit is to create
ideas; taste is to confine ideas to the proper form which fits the laws of productive imagination, and thus is to create (fingendi) in an original way (not imitatively). A product
composed with spirit and taste can be called poesy and is a work belonging to the fine arts. Such a product can be presented directly to the senses by means of the eyes or ears.Poesy can also be called the art of poetry (poetica in sensu lato); 45 it comprises painting, gardening, architecture, music, and the
149
 150
art of making verse (poetica in sensu stricto). 46 The art of poetry, however, to contrast it with rhetoric, is different from rhetoric only in the mutual submission of understanding
and sensibility. The art of poetry is an activity of the sensibility organized by the understanding; rhetoric is a transaction of the understanding animated by sensibility. Both
however, the orator and the poet (in a broad sense), are makers47 who generate out of their own selves new forms [247] (combinations of what is sensuous) in their imagination.*
Since the poetic gift implies an aptitude for art and, combined with taste, a talent for the fine arts which aim partly at illusion (although it is sweet and often also indirectly
beneficial), it is obvious that not much (often even harmful) use of the poetic gift has been made in life. To appreciate the character of the poet and the influence which his craft
has upon himself and others, it is worthwhile to ask some questions and provide some comments.48
Why does poetry among the fine (eloquent) arts win the prize over rhetoric, even when their purposes are precisely the same? Because poetry is at the same time music (it can be
sung) and tone, it is a sound pleasant for its own sake, something which does not apply to mere speech. Even rhetoric borrows from poetry one sound
* Novelty in the presentation of a concept is a principal demand made by the fine arts upon the poet, even if the concept itself should not be new. But for the understanding
(without regard to taste) one has the following expressions for the augmentation of our knowledge through new perceptions. To discover something is perceiving something
for the first time that was already there, for example, America, the magnetic force existing at the poles, or atmospheric electricity. To invent is bringing into being what has not
been there before, for example, the compass and the aerostat. To track down something is recovering something lost, by searching. To devise and to contrive have to do with
tools for the artist, or machines. To fabricate is consciously representing the false as true, as in novels where it happens only for entertainment. Fiction propagated as truth,
however, is a lie.
(Turpiter atrum desinit in piscem mulier formosa supernHoratius.)
[The woman, well shaped on top, ends below ugly in a black fishEd.]
150
 151
that approaches tone, namely, the accent, without which speech would lack the necessary interspersed moments of pause and emphasis. Poetry, however, does not only win the
prize over rhetoric, but also over any other of the fine arts, like painting (including sculpture), and even music. Music is a fine (not merely pleasant) art only because it serves
poetry as a vehicle. Also, there are among poets not so many shallow heads (unfit for business), as there are among musicians, because poets speak also to the understanding,
while musicians speak only to the senses. A good poem is the most penetrating means of enlivening the mind. It is true, however, not merely of the poets but [248] of every artist,
that one must be born to it, and that one cannot attain it by industry and imitation. Also, to succeed in his work, the artist needs to be possessed of a good disposition as well as a
moment of inspiration (therefore he is also called vates), because whatever is made according to instructions and rules turns out to be spiritless (slavish). But a product of the fine
arts requires not only taste, which may be based upon imitation, but also originality of thought, which, as self-inspired, is called spirit. The artist who depicts Nature 49 with the
paintbrush or the pen (be it in prose or in verse) does not have the beautiful spirit, because he only imitates. The artist who depicts ideas50 is the only master of fine arts.
Why does one usually understand that a poet is a writer of verse, that is, a discourse which can be scanned (and should be spoken rhythmically like music)? Heralding a work of
the fine arts, the poet proceeds with solemnity which must satisfy the most refined taste (in respect to form), otherwise the work of art would not be beautiful. Since such
solemnity is mostly required of the beautiful representation of the sublime, a similarly affected solemnity without verse is called (by Hugh Blair) ''prose run mad."51 Versification,
on the other hand, is not poetry if it has no spirit.
Why is rhyme in the verses of the poets of modern
151
 152
times, when the poet is happy to bring his thought to conclusion, such a great prerequisite of taste in our part of the world? On the other hand, why is rhyme 52 a repugnant insult
against verse found in the poetry of ancient times, so that now, for example, verse free of rhyme in German is not very pleasing, and Virgil's Latin rendered in rhyme is even less
pleasing? Probably because prosody was fixed for the old classic poets; but in the modern languages prosody is, for the most part, lacking, and the ear must make up for this with
rhyme which concludes a line with a sound similar to that of the preceding one. In a prosaic, solemn discourse a rhyme occurring accidentally among other sentences becomes
ridiculous.How does it happen that poetic license, which does not belong to the orator, takes the liberty of violating the laws of language every now and then? It is caused probably by the
fact that the orator does not feel too much constrained by the law of form when he expresses a great thought.
Why is a mediocre poem intolerable, while a mediocre [249] speech is still bearable? The cause for this appears to lie in the fact that the solemnity of tone in every poetical work
arouses great expectation; and, just because this expectation is not satisfied, attention usually sinks lower than the prosaic value of the poem would perhaps merit. Completing a
poem with a verse which can be remembered as an aphorism provides a gratifying aftertaste, and thereby makes up for much of this staleness; thus it also belongs to the art of the
poet.
In old age, when the sciences still promise good health and activity to a sound mind, the poetic vein dries up. This seems to be so because beauty is a blossom, whereas science is
a fruit; that is, poesy must be a free art which, on account of its variety, requires facility; but in old age this facile sense dwindles away (and justly so). Furthermore, the poetic
vein dries up because the habit of proceeding only on the same road as the sciences drags
152
 153
facility along with it; therefore poetry, which requires originality and novelty (and a skill for this too) for every one of her productions, does not agree well with old age, except
perhaps in matters of caustic wit, in epigrams, and xenia, 53 where poetry is more serious than playful.
That poets make no such fortune as lawyers and others in the learned professions lies in the disposition of their temperament which is, on the whole, a characteristic of the born
poet. The poet has the ability to drive sorrows away by means of the malleable play with thoughts. A peculiarity, however, which refers to the character, namely, of having no
character, but being ill-humored, peevish, and (without malice) unreliable, of intentionally making enemies for oneself, though without hating anyone, and of jeering at one's
friend in a sarcastic way, without wanting to harm him, all this goes back to a partly innate disposition of perverted intelligence dominating practical judgment.
On Opulence
§ 72.54 Opulence (luxus) is the excess of tasteful social life of pleasure, within a commonwealth (a life of pleasure which actually runs contrary to the welfare of that
commonwealth). Any excess without taste, however, is obvious debauchery (luxuries). If one considers [250] the effects of both on human welfare, then opulence is a dispensable
expenditure which makes us poor, while debauchery is of the kind that makes us ill. Opulence, nevertheless, is still related to the advancing culture of a nation (as to arts and
sciences); debauchery, however, overindulges in consumption and finally arouses disgust. Both are more ostentatious (glittering on the outside) than self-pleasing; opulence does
this through elegance (as at balls and in the theaters) for the ideal taste; debauchery does this through superabundance and variety for the sense of tasting (the physical
153
 154
sense, as, for example, at the feast of a Lord Mayor). Whether the government has the right to restrict both by sumptuary laws is a question which does not belong here. But to
suppress 55 the fine arts as well as the pleasant arts entirely, which partly weaken the nation, so that the people can be more easily governed, would work directly against the
intentions of a government if a crude Spartan rule [laconicism] should be introduced.
The art of good living is the proper equivalent to living well as to sociability (that is, to living with taste). One can conclude from this that luxury is injurious to good living. The
expression, "He knows how to live," used about an opulent or aristocratic person, means that he is skillful in his choice of lasting social pleasures which include temperance
(sobriety) in making pleasures mutually beneficial.
Since opulence can be criticized only in public life, not in domestic life, it must be concluded that the relation of the citizen to the commonwealth as far as the freedom of
competition is concerned as to the adornment of one's own person or possession (at feasts, weddings, funerals, and on down to well-mannered behavior) can only with difficulty,
for the sake of the anticipation of the useful, be burdened by sumptuary law. This should be so because opulence still offers the advantage of animating the arts, thereby returning
to the commonwealth those expenses which such luxuries may have incurred.
154
 155
[251] Third Book
On the Faculty of Desire§ 73. 1 Desire (appetitio) is the self-definition of the power of a subject to imagine something in the future as an effect of such imagination. Habitual sensuous desire is called
inclination. Desiring without emphasis on the production of the object is wish. Wish may be directed toward objects for whose production the subject himself feels incapable; in
such a case it is an empty (idle) wish. The empty wish to overcome the time between the desire and the acquisition of the desired object is yearning. The undetermined desire, as
to the object (appetitio vaga), which only incites the subject to get out of his present condition without knowing where he wants to go, can be called a capricious wish (which
cannot be satisfied with anything).
The inclination which can hardly, or not at all, be controlled by reason is passion. On the other hand, emotion is the feeling of a pleasure or displeasure at a particular moment,
which does not give rise to reflection (namely the process of reason whether one should submit to it or reject it).
To be subject to emotions and passions is probably always an illness of mind because both emotion and passion, exclude the sovereignty of reason. Both are also equally strong
according to degree; but in accordance with their quality, emotion and passion are essentially
155
 156
distinct from one another as to the method of prevention as well as in that of cure which the physician of souls would have to employ.
[252] On Emotion in Contrast to Passion
§ 74. 2 Emotion is surprise3 through sensation, whereby the composure of mind (animus sui compos) is suspended. Emotion therefore is precipitate, that is, it quickly grows to a
degree of feeling which makes reflection impossible (it is thoughtless). Apathy,4 which has not diminished the intensity of the stimuli for action, is self-possession which has
retained sound understanding. It is a characteristic of the experienced person (animi strenui) not to let himself be drawn away from peaceful deliberation by the intensity of these
stimuli. What the emotion of anger does not accomplish quickly will not be accomplished at all. The emotion of anger easily forgets. But the passion of hate takes its time to root
itself deeply and to associate itself with the energy. A father and a teacher cannot punish as long as they have had the patience to listen to apologies (not to justifications). If a
person comes to your room in anger in order to say harsh words in great wrath, politely ask him to be seated, and, if you succeed in this, his scolding will already be milder
because the comfort of sitting is a relaxation which does not really conform to the menacing gesticulations and screaming while one is standing. Passion, however violently it may
present itself (as a frame of mind belonging to the faculty of desire), takes its time, and is deliberative in order to achieve its purpose. Emotion works like water that breaks
through a dam; passion works like a river digging itself deeper and deeper into its bed. Emotion works upon the health like a stroke of apoplexy; passion works like consumption
or atrophy.
156
 157
Emotion is like an intoxicant which one has to sleep off, although it is still followed by a headache; but passion is looked upon as an illness having resulted from swallowing
poison, or a handicap which requires an inner or an outer physician for the soul, one who knows how to prescribe cures that are generally not radical, but almost always only of a
palliative nature.
Wherever there is much emotion, there is generally little passion; as in the French, who are fickle, in comparison to the vivacity of Italians and Spaniards (as well as Indians and
Chinese) who are consistent in their brooding rage concerning revenge, and consistent in their affairs of love right to the point of insanity. Emotions are honorable and
unconcealed, while passions are deceitful and hidden. The Chinese reproach the English [253] with being impetuous and hotheaded "like the Tartars," but vice versa the English
reproach the Chinese with being perfect (though tempered) deceivers whose passion is not shaken by this reproach. Emotion is like an intoxicant which can be slept off; passion is
to be regarded as an insanity which broods over an idea that is imbedding itself deeper and deeper. Whoever loves can keep his vision intact; but the person who is in love is
inevitably blind to the mistakes of the beloved object, although the latter will usually regain his vision a week after the wedding. Whoever is customarily seized by emotion with
rapture, no matter how good-natured he may be, still resembles a deranged person; just because he regrets his rapture so soon afterward, it is only a paroxysm, which they call
thoughtlessness. Many a person even wishes that he could be angry; and Socrates was in doubt whether it would not be good to be angry sometimes; but to have emotion so much
under control that one can cold-bloodedly deliberate whether or not one ought to be angry appears to be something paradoxical. Passion, on the other hand, no man 5 wishes for
himself. Who wants to have himself put in chains when he can be free?
157
 158
On the Emotions in Particular
A. On the Regulation of the Mind with Regard to Emotions§ 75. 6 The principle of apathy, that is, that the prudent man must at no time be in a state of emotion, not even in that of sympathy with the woes of his best friend, is an entirely
correct and sublime moral precept of the Stoic school because emotion makes one (more or less) blind. Nevertheless, the wisdom of Nature has planted in us a disposition for
apathy in order to hold the reins provisionally, before reason attains the necessary control. For the purpose of enlivening us Nature has done so by adding to the moral motives for
the Good those motives of pathological (sensuous) inducement as a temporary surrogate of reason. Moreover, emotion taken by itself alone is always imprudent; it makes itself
incapable of pursuing its own purpose, and it is therefore unwise to allow it to arise intentionally. However, in projecting the morally good, reason can produce the enlivening of
our will (in sermons, political speeches to the people, [254] and speeches just to oneself) by combining its ideas with illustrations (examples) which have been attributed to the
ideas; consequently it is enlivening, not as effect, but as the cause of an emotion with respect to the good, wherein reason still holds the reins, creating an enthusiasm of good
intentions which, however, must be attributed to the faculty of desire and not to the emotion as a stronger sensuous feeling.
Nature's gift of apathy, in the case of sufficient spiritual strength, is, as has been said already, happy self-possession (in the moral sense). He who is gifted with it, is not yet a wise
man, but he enjoys the favor of Nature to become wise more easily than others.
On the whole, it is not the intensity of a certain feeling which creates the emotional state, but the want of
158
 159
reflection in the comparison of this feeling with the sum of all feelings (of pleasure or displeasure) in one's own condition. The rich person, whose servant clumsily smashes a
beautiful and rare crystal goblet while waiting on table, would consider this incident of no importance if he compared at that moment this loss of a single gratification with the
multitude of all gratifications which his fortunate position as a rich person affords him. But if he completely gives himself to this one feeling of grief (without making such a
quick survey in his thoughts), then it is no wonder that he feels as if his whole state of bliss were lost. 7
B. On the Various Emotions Themselves
§ 76.8 The feeling which motivates the subject to remain in the state in which he currently finds himself is pleasant; but the feeling which motivates him to abandon it is
unpleasant. Combined with consciousness, the first feeling is called gratification (voluptas), and the second is called dissatisfaction (taedium). As emotion, the first feeling is
called joy, the other sadness. Exuberant joy (untempered by any concern for grief) and absorbing sadness (unmitigated by any hope), or sorrow, are emotions which threaten life.
Nevertheless, one [255] can see from the death lists that more persons have lost their lives suddenly on account of exuberant joy than on account of sorrow. The mind embraces
hope as an emotion without reservation because of the unexpected emergence of a prospect of immeasurable good fortune; consequently, the emotion keeps rising until it reaches
the point of suffocation. However, the continually fearful sorrow is naturally and always opposed by the mind, so that sorrow can only kill slowly.
Fright is suddenly aroused fear which disturbs the mind's composure. Similar to fright is the shocking, something which disconcerts (though not yet dismays) and which awakens
the mind to collect itself for reflec159
 160
tion; it is the stimulus to astonishment (which already contains reflection). To the experienced person this does not happen so easily, but it is characteristic of art, to represent the
usual in a striking way, so that it will be startling. Wrath is a fright which immediately stirs up the forces for opposing evil. Fear of an object which threatens an undetermined evil
is anxiety. One may experience anxiety without having a particular object in mind, in which case it is an uneasiness arising from merely subjective causes (an unhealthy
condition). Shame is anguish arising from a committed contempt of a person who is present, and as such it is an emotion. Moreover, a person may feel considerably ashamed
without the presence of the person concerned; in such a case, however, we have not emotion, but rather, as with sorrow, we have a passion to torture oneself with contempt
continuously, but in vain; shame, on the other hand, as an emotion, must occur suddenly.
Emotions are generally morbid occurrences (symptoms) and may be divided (according to analogy with 9 Brown's system) into sthenic emotions as to strength and asthenic
emotions as to weakness. Sthenic emotions are of the exciting and frequently exhausting nature; asthenic emotions are of a sedative nature which often prepare for relaxation.
Laughing with emotion is a convulsive gaiety. Weeping accompanies10 the diminishing sensation of a helpless quarrel with fate or other people, like a sensation of insult that has
been suffered; but this latter11 sensation is called melancholy. Both, laughing as well as weeping,12 have a way of cheering one up because they liberate from whatever curbs
vitality through their overflowing (one may also laugh oneself to tears if one laughs until exhaustion). Laughing is masculine, while weeping is feminine (effeminate [256] in the
case of men). Only the becoming overwhelmed by tears, which arises from magnanimous but helpless sympathy with the sorrows of others, can be excused in a man whose eyes
are shining with tears, as long as he does not
160 161
allow them to fall in drops, and as long as he can avoid accompanying the tears with sobbing, thus making disagreeable music.
On Cowardice and Bravery
§ 77. 13 Anguish, anxiety, horror, and dread are degrees of fear, that is, of the aversion to danger. The composure of mind which is determined to overcome fear with reflection is
courage; the strength of the inner sense (ataraxia) which does not allow itself to be put easily into a state of fear is intrepidity. The want of such courage is cowardice;* the want
of intrepidity is shyness.
Stouthearted is he who does not become startled; courage has he who uses his mind and does not retreat upon danger; brave is he whose courage persists during dangers.
Foolhardy is the frivolous person who risks facing dangers because he does not know them. Bold is he who risks his life although he is aware of the dangers; rash is he who, in the
face of a manifest impossibility, tries to reach his goal by subjecting himself to the greatest danger (like Charles XII at Bender).14 The Turks call their brave men madmen
(perhaps because of opium). Cowardice is, consequently, shameful despair.
Fright is not the habitual tendency to be scared easily, because this tendency is called timidity; but fright is only a condition and accidental disposition, mostly dependent upon
bodily causes alone, of feeling not prepared enough for suddenly arising danger. When the unexpected approach of the enemy is announced to a field marshal, who is still in his
dressing-gown, his blood may well freeze for an instant in the chambers of his heart; a physician once observed that a certain general was fainthearted and shy whenever he had
acid indiges-
* The word poltroon (derived from pollex truncatus) was rendered with murcus in later Latin, and signified a person who chops off his thumb so that he will not be drafted
into the war.
161
 162
tion. But stoutheartedness is only 15 a characteristic of temperament. Courage, on the other hand, rests upon principles and is a virtue. Reason gives the resolute man strength
when nature sometimes denies it to him. Fright in [257] battle even produces salutary evacuations which have proverbially given rise to jesting (not having one's heart in the right
place);16 however, one will have noticed that those very sailors, who at the summons to fight hasten to the place of riddance, are afterward the most courageous in the hour of
battle. The same holds true also of the heron preparing himself for battle when the swooping falcon hovers over him.
Patience is, accordingly, not courage. Patience is a feminine virtue because it does not muster the strength for opposition, it only hopes to make sorrows (suffering) bearable
through habit. He who shrieks under the surgeon's knife or under the pains of gout or stone is therefore not cowardly or weak in such a situation. Shrieking is like the cursing
when one is out walking and hurts one's toe on a cobblestone in the street (the big toe, from which the word hallucinari is derived).17 This cursing is rather an outburst of anger,
in which nature tries to break up the constriction of blood in the heart with words. Patience of a particular kind is shown by the Indians in America, who throw away their
weapons when they are encircled and, without begging for pardon, let themselves be slain quietly. Does this indicate more courage than the Europeans display, who in such a
situation tend to defend themselves to the last man? To me it seems to be just a barbaric vanity intended to preserve the honor of the trible so that the enemy could not force them
to lament and beg as indications of submission.
Courage as emotion (belonging partially to sensuality) can also be aroused by reason and thus be genuine bravery (virtuous strength). Not allowing oneself to be intimidated by
something that is sacred, by sarcastic derision even when it is more temptingly seasoned with taunts and trickery, but instead pursuing one's own
162
 163
course steadfastly, is a moral courage which many a person does not possess who otherwise excels as brave on the battlefield or in a duel. It takes a high degree of determination
to do what duty demands, even at the danger of being ridiculed by others. It takes a high degree because love of honor is the constant companion of virtue; and he who can
otherwise well withstand force seldom feels strong enough to endure ridicule if his claim to honor is sneeringly refused. 18
[258] Proper behavior which presents an external appearance of courage, so that one does not lose one's honor in comparison to others, is audacity.19 Audacity is opposed to
timidity, a kind of bashfulness and concern not to appear favorably in the eyes of others. Audacity cannot be criticized as cheap confidence in one's self. But the kind of audacity*
in behavior, which gives the appearance of not caring about the judgment of others, is foolhardiness, effrontery, or, in a milder term, pretentiousness; it does not belong to courage,
in the moral sense of the word.20
Whether suicide also presupposes courage, or always despair only, is not a moral but merely a psychological question. If it is committed just for the sake of not outliving one's
honor, hence committed out of anger, then it appears to be courage; however, if it is due to consuming grief after the exhaustion of patience with suffering, then it is a case ofdespair. Looking death straight in the eye and not being afraid of it seems to fill man with a kind of heroism when he cannot love life any longer. If, however, although someone
may fear death,
* The German word for audacity should really be spelled Dräustigkeit (from dräuen or drohen) instead of Dreistigkeit, because the tone or countenance of such a person
may cause others to be afraid that he could also be impolite. The same holds true for the spelling of the German word liederlich (untidy) as lüderlich (disgusting), because
the former signifies an easygoing, playful, but still useful and well-meaning person, whereas the latter refers to an outcast who arouses disgust in other people (relating to
the word Luder, carrion).
163
 164
he still cannot stop loving life in every respect, a state of mental bewilderment stemming from anxiety must inevitably have occurred first, so that the step toward suicide can be
taken. Such a person dies from cowardice because he can no longer bear the agonies of life. To some extent the manner of execution of the suicide reveals the following
differentiations of mental attitude. If the chosen means is sudden and fatal beyond possible rescue, as, for example, the firing of a pistol, or a dose of acid sublimate (as once
carried by a great monarch 21 during time of war, in case he should be captured by the enemy), or deep water together with pockets weighted with stones, then one cannot dispute
the courage of the person who has committed suicide. However, there are attempts in which the life of the victim can be saved, and if it is saved, he is usually [259] happy once
more and will not attempt to take his life again. Such means of suicide are, for example, the rope which still can be cut by someone else, an ordinary poison which a physician can
remove from the body, or a slitting of the throat which can be sewn up again and healed. These means indicate cowardly despair born of weakness, and not vigorous despair
which still requires strength of mind for such an act.
They are not always merely dejected and worthless souls who decide to rid themselves of the burden of life in this manner. Indeed, those who have no feeling for real honor rarely
commit the deed. Since such a deed will always remain hideous, and since by committing it man makes a monster of himself, it is noteworthy that in periods of public and legally
declared injustice during a revolutionary situation (for example, the Public Welfare Committee of the French Republic) honor-loving men (for example, Roland)22 have tried to
forestall such legal execution by resorting to suicide, an act which under normal constitutional conditions they themselves would have referred to as objectionable. The reason for
this is that in every legal execution there is something disgraceful, because it is punishment; and, if the punishment is
164
 165
unjust, the victim who is sacrificed to the law cannot acknowledge the punishment as being deserved. He proves through his act, however, that, when sentenced to die, he would
rather choose to die as a free man and carry the sentence out himself. Consequently, tyrants (like Nero) considered it a gesture of favor to permit the condemned person to kill
himself, because it then was done with more honor. The morality of this, however, I do not claim to justify.
The courage of the warrior is quite different from that of the duelist. Dueling is not explicity permitted by law, but the government is lenient about duels. The military has made
dueling an affair of honor, a self-defense against insult in which the supervisors do not interfere. Not keeping a strict eye on the terrible aspects of dueling is an oversight by the
head of state, because there are infamous people who like to risk their lives only in order to draw attention. Those who put their life on the line for the state are not being spoken
of here.
Bravery is courage within the framework of the law, where duty commands that not even the potential loss of life should discourage action. Fearlessness alone is of no account,
but moral integrity (mens conscia recti) 23 must be combined with it, as in the case of Seigneur de Bayard (chevalier sans peur et sans reproche).24
[260] On Emotions which Weaken Themselves as to Their Purpose (Impotentes Animi Motus)25
§ 78.26 Emotions of anger and shame share the characteristic that they weaken themselves with regard to their purpose. They are suddenly27 aroused feelings against an evil
which has been interpreted as an insult. However, these feelings are also incapacitating because of their intensity, so that the evil cannot be effectively averted.
Who is more to be feared, he who grows pale in violent anger, or he who flushes in the same situation?
165
 166
The first one is to be feared instantly; the second is more to be feared later (because of his vindictiveness). In the first case the upset person is terrified of himself because he fears
being driven to violence which he might later repent. In the second case terror suddenly changes into the concern that his own awareness of his inability to defend himself should
not become apparent. If people are able to unburden themselves by quickly expressing their feelings, neither emotion is detrimental to health; however, when people cannot do so,these emotions can either in some degree be dangerous to life itself, or, if the outburst is suppressed, the feelings leave resentment behind, that is, a grieving over not having
responded to insult with proper means. Such resentment, however, is avoided if people can verbalize their concerns. However, left alone both emotions are of the sort that make
people speechless. For this reason these emotions present themselves in a disadvantageous light.
Hot temper can be controlled gradually by inner discipline of the mind; but the weakness of an oversensitive feeling of honor at moments of shyness does not lend itself so easily
to control. Hume says 28 (who himself was afflicted with such an infirmity, namely shyness of making public statements), that if the first attempt at boldness fails, the result is
more bashfulness. As remedy, nothing else remains but to begin to be with persons whose judgment concerning behavior one does not care much about, so that one can gradually
overcome the supposed important judgment of others concerning ourselves and thereby rank the importance of our own judgment equally with theirs. Such a habit produces
freedom of mind, which is far from shyness and insulting audacity.
We sympathize with someone else's shyness as if it were a pain, but we do not sympathize with the anger of a person when he actually demonstrates to us with emotion the motive
of his anger. [261] If a person is in such a state, the other person, who has to listen to his story (of
166
 167
the insult which has been inflicted), cannot feel safe himself.
Surprise (embarrassment at finding oneself in an unexpected situation) at first impedes the natural flow of thought; it is unpleasant; but later it promotes the influx of thoughts
beyond expectation and becomes an agreeable excitement of feeling. This emotion is legitimately called astonishment only if one is uncertain whether the perception occurs when
one is awake or dreaming. A neophyte in the world gets excited about everything; but he who has become acquainted with the course of things through varied experience makes it
a rule of conduct to be surprised at nothing (nihil admirari). On the other hand, he who thoughtfully and with a searching eye investigates the laws of Nature in all their immense
variety is stricken with astonishment when he stumbles upon a wisdom he was not aware of. It is a wonderment from which he cannot tear himself away (and about which he
cannot be surprised enough). Such an emotion can only be aroused by reason, and it is a kind of sacred shudder to feel the abyss of the transcendental opening up before one's feet.
On the Emotions by which Nature Mechanically Strengthens Health
§ 79. 29 By means of several emotions good health is mechanically promoted by nature. Laughing and weeping especially serve this end.30 Anger31 too, if one can scold freely
(without fear of opposition), is a rather sure way to aid digestion; and many a housewife has no other emotional exercise than the scolding of her children and32 servants. If the
children and servants submit patiently33 to this, a pleasant feeling of fatigue will spread vitality34 uniformly through the organism. However, this remedy is not without danger
because of potential resistance by the members of the household.
167
 168
Good-humored (not malicious and bitter) laughing is, however, more highly esteemed and more beneficial. It is exactly what should have been recommended to the Persian king
who offered a prize to the person [262] ''Who would discover a new means of delectation."Jerky (nearly convulsive) exhalation of breath (of which sneezing is only a small but
enlivening effect, if its sound is allowed to go unrestrained) strengthens the feeling of vitality through the wholesome exercise of the diaphragm. It may be a hired jester
(harlequin) who makes us laugh, 35 or a cunning knave among our friends who seems to have nothing mischievous on his mind. Waiting for his moment, he does not laugh with
the others, but then with apparent innocence he suddenly makes his crack (like a taut string). The resulting laughter is always an exercise of muscles which are used for digestion.
Laughing helps digestion better than the wisdom of the physician. Even36 a great absurdity of faulty judgment37 may have the same effect, though at the expense of the one who
claimed to be the smartest.*
Weeping, inhaling, accompanied by (convulsive) sobbing and tear-shedding, is a soothing remedy as well as a provision of nature for one's state of health. A widow who, as the
saying explains, will not allow herself to be comforted, that is, who does not want to know how to dry
* Many examples of this can be provided. But I shall give only one, which I have heard from the lips of the late Countess of K---g, a lady who was the shining ornament
of her sex. [Countess von KeyserlingTrans.] Count Sagramoso, who once had the commission to establish the Order of the Knights of Malta in Poland (of Ostrogothic
appointment), had paid her a visit, and it happened that a man joined them, who was born in Königsberg, but who was now employed by several rich merchants in
Hamburg as a collector and curator of collections which they had gathered as a hobby in their private galleries. This man was visiting his relatives in Prussia. In order to
strike up a conversation the count said to him in broken German: "I 'ave 'ad an aunt in 'Amburg (I used to have an aunt in Hamburg), but now she is dead." Quickly the
curator replied: "Why don't you have her skinned and stuffed?" He had taken the English word aunt, which means Tante in German, for Ente (duck); and, because it
occurred to him that it must have been a very rare specimen, he was bewailing the great loss. You can imagine what laughter this misunderstanding must have stirred up.
168 169
up the flow of tears, unknowingly or unintentionally takes care of her health. Anger, which might arise in this situation, would quickly stem the flow of tears, but it would also
damage her health; although women and children are brought to tears not only by suffering but also by anger. The sensation of one's [263] helplessness against an evil, together
with a strong emotion (be it anger or sadness), calls for the assistance of the external natural signs which then (according to the right of the weaker one) disarm the person, at least
if it is a male. This expression of tenderness, as a weakness of the sex, however, must not permit the male involved to be moved to shedding tears, but only to have tears in his
eyes; because in the first instance he would be transgressing against his own sex, and so, with his femininity, he would not be able to serve as protector of the weaker sex; and in
the second instance he would not be showing the other sex any of the sympathy which his masculinity demands of him, namely, to provide protection for the other sex as befits
the character which books about knights attribute to a man of valor.
But why do young people prefer tragic drama and prefer to perform it whenever they want to offer entertainment to their parents? And why do older people prefer comedy, even
burlesque? The reason for the former is partly the same as the one which moves children to probe the dangerous; they are probably motivated by the instinct of nature to test their
strength; given the lightheartedness of youth, another reason for it is also partly due to the fact that no melancholy remains of oppressive and terrifying impressions when the play
has ended, but rather there is only a pleasant feeling of fatigue after a strong internal emotion, which disposes people to new joy. On the other hand, such impressions are not so
easily forgotten by older people, who are not able to bring back the disposition of joyfulness so easily. By his antics a harlequin with his nimble wit causes a beneficial exercise of
the diaphragm and the intestine so
169
 170
that the appetite for the ensuing social supper is whetted and the conversation at the table is inspired.
General Observation
Certain interior physical feelings are related to the emotions, but they are not identical with them since they 38 are only momentary and transitory, leaving no trace behind. Of the
same nature is the shuddering which seizes children when they listen at night to their nurses' ghost stories. Shivering, as when being doused with cold water (as in a rainstorm), is
related to the same thing. Not the perception of danger, but the mere thought of danger, [264] although one knows that none is present, produces this sensation which, as a mere
sensation and not as an explosion of fright, seems not to be unpleasant.
Giddiness and even seasickness,39 according to their origin, seem to belong to the class of such hypothetical dangers. Without hesitation one can proceed to walk across a board
that is lying on the ground, but if it bridges an abyss or even, for one with weak nerves, a ditch, then the mere concern about danger will often be perceived as real danger. Even
the tossing of a ship in a gentle wind is a change between sinking and rising. With the sinking goes the effort of nature to rise again (because all sinking is associated with
danger). Therefore the up-and-down movement of the stomach and the bowels is mechanically accompanied by an inducement to vomiting which increases when the patient looks
out of the window of his cabin, catching alternate glimpses of the sky and the sea, whereby the illusion increases that the seat is sinking from underneath him.
An actor who is unmoved himself, but otherwise possesses understanding and strong imagination, may often arouse us more by his affected (artificial) emotions than by genuine
emotions. A serious lover is often restrained, awkward, and uncaptivating in the presence of
170
 171
his beloved. But he who only pretends to be madly in love, and who has no other talent, can play his role so naturally that he lures the poor, deceived maiden wholly into his
snare, just because his heart is uninhibited and his head clear; consequently, he has full command of the free use of his skill and craft to imitate the appearance of a lover very
naturally.
Good-natured (openhearted) laughter (which belongs to the emotion of joyfulness) is sociable; malicious (sneering) laughter is hostile. The distracted person (like Terrasson 40
entering solemnly with his nightcap instead of his peruke on his head, and holding his hat in his hand, still in deep thought about the contention of superiority of the ancients over
the moderns with respect to knowledge), often causes the first type of laughter; he is laughed about but still not ridiculed. The not so imprudent odd person is smiled about,
without it costing him anything, for he joins in the laughter. A person who has a mechanical (spiritless) laughter is insipid and makes his presence unsavory. The person41 who
does not laugh in company at all is either peevish or pedantic. Children, [265] especially girls, must be accustomed early to frank and unrestrained smiling, because the
cheerfulness of their facial features will gradually make an imprint on the inner self and establish a disposition of joyfulness, friendliness, and sociability, which can be achieved
through this early preparation for the virtue of kindliness.
It is a good-natured and at the same time a refined means of animating a conversation to use a person in one's company as a butt for witty remarks (pull his leg) without being
cutting (joking without invective), especially when the other person's remarks can reply in kind, thus seasoning the conversation with merry laughter. But if this occurs at theexpense of a simpleton whom one tosses back and forth like a ball, then the laughter, being malicious joy, is unmannerly, to say the least. Again, if it happens to a sponger who
for indulgence gives himself to
171
 172
reveling or allows himself to be made a fool of, then it is evidence of bad taste and also evidence of the callous moral feeling of those who can laugh about this till their sides
split. The task of the court jester, however, who is to season the meal and to shake the diaphragm of the chief person with laughter by teasing his most distinguished servants, is,
whichever way one takes it, either above or beneath all criticism.
On Passions
§ 80. 42 The subjective possibility of having a certain desire arise, which precedes the representation of its object, is propensity (propensio). The inner compulsion of the faculty of
desire to take this object into possession, before one is acquainted with it, is instinct (like the mating instinct, or the parental instinct of an animal to protect its offspring, and so
forth). A subject's sensuous desire which has become customary (habit) is called inclination (inclinatio).43 Inclination, which hinders the use of reason to compare, at a particular
moment of choice, a specific inclination against the sum of all inclinations, is passion (passio animi).
Since the passions can be coupled with the calmest reflection, one can easily see that they must neither be rash like the emotions, nor stormy and transitory; instead, they must
take roots gradually and even be able to coexist with reason. One can also easily see that passions do the greatest harm to freedom; and if emotion [266] is a delirium, then passion
is an illness which abhors all medication. Therefore, passion is by far worse than all those transitory emotions which stir themselves at least to the good intention of improvement;
instead, passion is an enchantment which also rejects improvement.
One labels passion with the word mania (ambition, thirst for revenge, lust of power, and so forth), the only
172
 173
exception is love when it refers to having fallen-in-love. This is so because when love has been satisfied (by indulgence), the desire, at least with regard to the very person
involved, ceases altogether. For this reason only an impassioned state of love can be displayed (as long as the partner remains steadfast in refusal), but no physical love can be
displayed that may be specified as passion, because, as to its object, it does not contain any persevering principle. Passion always presupposes a maxim of the subject, namely, to
act according to a purpose prescribed for him by his inclination. Passion is, therefore, always associated with the purposes of reason, and one cannot attribute passions to mere
animals any more than to purely rational beings. Ambition, thirst for revenge, and so forth, just because they 44 are never completely satisfied, are counted, therefore, among the
passions as illnesses for which there is only a palliative remedy.
§ 81.45 Passions are cancerous stores for pure practical reason, and most of them are incurable because the sick person does not want to be cured and avoids the dominion of the
principle by which alone a cure could be effected. In the area of what is sensuously practical, reason proceeds from the general to the particular, according to the axiom not to
please only a single inclination by placing all the rest in the shade or in a dark corner, but rather to see to it that it shares properly with the totality of all inclinations. The ambition
of a person may always be an inclination whose direction is sanctioned by reason; but the ambitious person desires, nevertheless, to be loved by others also; he needs pleasant
relations with others, maintenance of his assets, and so forth. But if he is, however, passionately ambitious, then he is blind to those other purposes which his inclinations also
offer to him. Consequently he ignores completely that he is hated by others or that he runs the risk of impoverishing himself through his extravagant ex173
 174
penses. This is foolishness (making one's partial purpose the whole of one's purpose) which even in its formal principle smacks reason right in the face.
[267] Therefore passions are not, like emotions, merely unfortunate moods teeming with many evils, but they are without exception bad. Even the most well-intended desire if it
aims (according to matter) at what belongs to virtue, that is, to charity, is nevertheless (according to form), as soon as it changes to passion, not merely pragmatically pernicious,
but also morally reprehensible.
Emotion produces a momentary loss of freedom and self-control. Passion surrenders both, and finds pleasure and satisfaction in a servile disposition. But because reason does not
desist from its summons to inner freedom, the unfortunate victim is suffering under the chains from which he cannot free himself, because they have already grown into his limbs,
so to speak.Nevertheless, the passions have also found their panegyrists (where are they not found, once malice has found its way into the rules of conduct?) who say that nothing great in this
world has ever been accomplished without strong passions; and that Providence itself has wisely planted passions like elastic springs into human nature. Concerning all those many
inclinations it may be readily admitted that those of a natural and animal necessity are the ones which the living nature (even man) cannot be without. But Providence has not
intended that inclinations become passions, nor that they should. The poet who represents passions from this point of view can be forgiven (Pope says: "If Reason is a magnet,
then the passions are wind"); 46 but the philosopher must not apply this principle, not even in order to praise the passions as a provisional arrangement of Providence which had
intentionally placed passions into human nature before the human race had reached the proper degree of culture.
174
 175
Classification of the Passions
Passions are divided into those of natural inclination (innate) and those arising from the culture of mankind (acquired).
Passions of the first kind are the inclinations of freedom and sex; [268] both are linked with emotion. Those of the second kind are ambition, lust of power, and avarice, qualities
which are not linked with vehement emotion but with the persistence of a maxim meant for a certain purpose. The first kind can be called burning passions (passiones ardentes);
while the second kind, like avarice, can be called cold passions (frigidae). All passions, however, are always desires directed only by men to men, not to things. For the use of a
fertile field, or a productive cow, one can have much inclination, but no emotion (which consists in the inclination for fellowship with others), or, even less, a passion.
A. On the Inclination to Freedom as a Passion
§ 82. 47 For natural man this is the strongest of all inclinations, which creates a condition in which he cannot avoid getting involved in mutual interrelations with other persons.
Whoever is able to be happy only at the option of another person (be this person as benevolent as you please) justly feels that he is unhappy. What guarantee does he have that his
powerful fellow human will concur with the person's own judgment concerning well-being? The uncivilized person (not yet accustomed to submission) knows no greater
misfortune than to have this befall him; and justly so, as long as no public law protects him until the time when discipline has gradually made him ready for it. Therefore his lot is
one of continuous rebellion, with the intention of keeping others as far away
175
 176
from him as possible, and living as a wanderer in the wilderness. In fact, the child who has just come from its mother's womb, unlike all other animals, seems to enter the world
with a loud shriek just because it considers the inability to make use of its limbs a restraint; consequently it announces this claim to freedom (which no other animal knows).*
Nomadic peoples [269] (like pastoral tribes) who are not attached to land property, for example the Arabs, although their mode of life is not entirely free from restraint, are so
proud of their way of life that they look with contempt on settled peoples, because the toil connected with this way of life has not been able to alienate these peoples from their
occupation over thousands of years. Mere hunting peoples (like the Olenni-Tungusi), by separating themselves from the other families which are related to them, have really
dignified themselves by this feeling of freedom. Thus, under moral laws, the concept of freedom awakens not
* Lucretius, the poet, interprets this indeed remarkable phenomenon of the animal kingdom in another way:
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut aequumst
Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum!
[And fills the air with lamenting cries
As it befits someone who still has to go through so much evil in his lifeEd.]
But the newborn child cannot very well have this prospect! However, the fact that the baby's feeling of discomfort does not originate from bodily pain, but from a vague idea
(or an analogous representation) of freedom and its suppression, perceived as an injustice, is disclosed a few months after the birth by tears which accompany the shrieking.
This indicates a sort of exasperation when he strives to get near certain objects or only tries to change his position and finds himself hindered. This impulse to have one's own
way and to perceive any hindrance in this respect as an insult, expresses itself particularly in the tone of the shriek and in the display of bad temper, which the mother finds
necessary to punish, although it is usually countered with still louder shrieking. The same thing occurs when the child happens to fall through his own fault. The young of other
animals play, while the young of human beings already begin to quarrel with each other. It appears as if a certain concept of justice (which applies to external freedom)
evolves together with the animal nature; consequently, it is not something that is gradually learned.
176 177
only the emotion which is called enthusiasm, but the mere sensory-projection of external freedom arouses the inclination to persist in it or to extend it into a strong passion by
analogy with the concept of justice. 48
Even the strongest inclination (such as the mixture of breeds) is not called passion among mere animals, because they have no reason. Reason alone establishes the concept of
freedom, and passion collides with it. The outbreak of passion must be attributed to human beings. It is said of humans that they love certain things passionately (such as drinking,
gambling, and hunting) or that they hate certain things (such as the musk and brandy). But these various inclinations or disinclinations are not called passions, because only a
certain number of various instincts deserve to be classified. There are so many states of passivity in the faculty of desire which should, according to the (innumerable) objects of
the faculty of desire, not be classified as things, but rather according [270] to the principle of use or misuse which men make of their person and of their freedom, since one man
makes another man a mere means to his own ends. Passions actually belong to human beings alone; they can be satisfied only by them.
These passions are ambition, lust of power, and avarice.
Since passions are inclinations concerned merely with the possession of means, and since all inclinations have to be satisfied that concern this purpose directly, passions seem to
manifest characteristics of reason. Particularly, passion appears to imitate the idea of a faculty which is closely linked with freedom, by which alone those purposes can be
attained. Possessing the means to any desired ends, however, reaches much farther than the inclination directed at a single inclination and its satisfactions. Therefore they may also
be called inclinations49 of delusion. The delusion consists in equalizing the mere opinion of someone regarding the value of a thing with the actual value of the thing.50
177
 178
B. On the Thirst for Vengeance as a Passion
§ 83. 51 While passions can only be inclinations directed by men toward men, as long as they are based on either agreeing or disagreeing purposes like love or hate, the concept of
justice, just because it originates directly from the concept of external freedom, is a much more important and a much more strongly motivating impulse than the impulse of
goodwill. Therefore, hatred, grown out of injustice suffered, and causing a thirst for vengeance, is a passion which arises irresistibly from human nature; but, evil as it may be, it
still remains a maxim of reason, based on a legitimate thirst for justice whose analogue it is. Thirst for vengeance is related to inclinations, and thus one of the most violent and
most deeply rooted passions; even if it appears extinguished, it still harbors secretly the smoldering remains of a hatred called grudge.
The desire to be in52 the same state as one's fellow humans and have a relation with them that grants everyone his share as justice requires is surely no passion, but only a
defining ground [271] for the free will provided by pure practical reason. However, excitability of this desire by sheer self-love, that is, just for one's own advantage, and not for
legislation beneficial to all, is a sensuous impulse of hate, not caused by injustice, but directed against those who are unjust to us. Such an inclination (to pursue and to destroy),
especially since an idea, though selfishly applied, lies at the bottom of it, transforms the desire for justice into the passion of revenge against the injuring person. The passion for
vengeance often mounts to frenzy, to the point of exposing oneself to ruin, as long as the enemy cannot escape the same fate. This hatred (in the case of a blood feud) is intended
to become a hereditary affair even between nations, because, as it is said, the blood of an offended, though not yet avenged, person clamors until the innocently spilled blood has
once again
178
 179
been washed away with blood, even if this blood should be from one of the offending man's innocent descendants.
C. On the Inclination Concerning the Ability of Having Influence over Others
§ 84. 53 This inclination comes closest to techno-practical reason, that is, the maxim of cleverness. Controlling the inclinations of other people in order to direct and manage them
according to one's own intentions, almost amounts to being in possession of them as mere instruments of one's own will. It is not surprising, then, that striving after the faculty to
have influence over others is a passion.
This faculty controls three powers, which are honor, authority, and money. By possessing these three powers, one can influence everybody, if not by means of one, then by means
of another, and thus make a person subject to one's intentions. The inclinations for this, if they become passions, are ambition, lust of authority, and avarice. In such a situation a
person becomes the fool (the deluded) of his own inclinations and fails in his purpose when he uses such means. However, we are not now speaking of wisdom, which admits of
no passions, but rather only of cleverness by which one can manage fools.
However, the passions, in their entirety, as strong as they may be as sensuous [272] motives, are nothing but weaknesses in view of what reason demands of people. Consequently,
the judicious man's ability to make use of those weaknesses can be proportionately smaller, the greater the passion is which rules the other person.54Ambition is a weakness of people, which allows them to be influenced through their opinions; lust of authority allows them to be influenced through their fear; and avarice allows
them to be influenced through their own interest. Servile submission will always result
179
 180
when a person has been seized by someone who has the faculty to use that person's inclinations for his own purposes. But being conscious of this faculty and being aware of
possessing the means to satisfy one's inclinations arouses the passion even more than the actual use of it.
A. Ambition
§ 85. 55 Man cannot expect that others respect him for his love of honor just because of his inner (moral) values; but what gives him respect is his striving for a reputation which
provides ample proof of his good intentions. (Arrogance is directed toward others who are to think little of themselves when they compare themselves to us. It is a foolishness
which acts contrary to its own purposes). Arrogance, I say, needs only to be flattered, and one already has control over the fool by means of his passion. Flatterers* and yes-men,
who gladly hang on every word of an important personage, nurse this passion which weakens their master; and they become the destroyers of the great and mighty who fall for
such charms.
Arrogance is a mistaken desire for honor which defeats its own purpose; it cannot be regarded as an intentional means of using other people [273] (whom it repels) for one's own
purposes. The arrogant person is rather the instrument of the knave, who is called a fool. Once a very intelligent and honest merchant asked me why the arrogant person was
always mean. (He had observed that a rich merchant was bragging about his wealth; but later, when he lost his assets that same man
* Flatterer (Schmeichler) may originally have been spelled Schmiegler (one who stoops and bends) in order to manage a conceited potentate [MS: dandyEd.], ad libitum,
just by his arrogance; as the word hypocrite (Heuchler), which really should be written Häuchler (puffer), ought to have designated a deceiver who expresses his false
show of sanctimonious humility before a very powerful ecclesiastic by means of deep sighs mixed with his speech.
180
 181
had no compunction about cringing and fawning.) I replied that since arrogance is directed toward another person so that he despises himself in comparison to others, such a
thought could only enter the head of someone who feels himself ready for such base action. Arrogance itself seems to provide a never-deceiving and forboding indication of the
baseness of such persons.
B. Lust of Authority
This passion is unjust per se, and its manifestation aligns everything against it. It arises from the fear of being ruled by others, and it then concerns itself with gaining a vantage
point over this danger before it is too late. But such a step is, nevertheless, a false and unjust means of using other people for one's own designs; partly, it is unwise because it
arouses opposition; and partly, it is unfair because it runs contrary to freedom under the law, which is everyone's right. The indirect art of domination, for example, the power of
the feminine sex to influence the male through sex and to use the man for her purposes, does not belong under this title, because it holds no authority of its own, but rather it
knows how to rule and to fascinate the person into submission through his own inclination. This is not to say that the feminine part of our species is free from wanting to rule over
the masculine element (just the opposite is true), but it does not use the same means to this end as the masculine. The feminine sex does not use the quality of strength (which
refers in this context to domination), but rather the quality of charm which directs itself toward the inclination of the other sex to submit.
[274] C. Avarice
Money is the password, and all doors, which are closed to the man of lesser means, fly open to those
181
 182
whom Plutus favors. The invention of money, which has no other usefulness (or at least it should not have any) except for the commercial exchange of the products of man's
industry, now serves all that is physically good among men. Especially after money was represented by metal, it has produced avarice which, finally, without indulgence, but by its
mere possession, and even with the resolution (of the stingy) not to spend it, still contains a power which people believe can sufficiently compensate for the lack of any other
power. This passion is quite shallow, even though it is not always morally reprehensible. It is merely cultivated mechanically and belongs chiefly to older persons (as a substitute
for their natural impotence). Because of its great influence, this passion has gained the reputation of a faculty. 56 Once a person has been seized by avarice, no modification ispossible; and, while the first of the three passions [ambition] makes one hated, and the second [lust of authority] makes one feared, this third one [avarice] makes one despised.57*
On the Inclination to Delusion, as a Passion
§ 86.58 By delusion, as a motive of desires, I understand the internal practical deception of taking subjective reasons for objective ones. So that a man does not lose the feeling of
life in mere enjoyment, Nature likes, from time to time, stronger excitement of vitality in order to rejuvenate the human activity. To this end, a very wise and benevolent Nature
has offered objects to the characteristically lazy man, which he takes in his imagination for real goals (modes of acquiring a
* Despise is here to be understood in the moral sense; because in a bourgeois sense, when it turns out to be true, as Pope says, that ''the devil in a golden rain of fifty to a
hundred falls into the lap of the usurer and takes possession of his soul," the great majority marvels at the man who demonstrates such great business acumen. [This quotation
could derive from Alexander Pope, "Moral Essays" (3): "Of the Use of Riches, lines 36974 in The Poetical Works (New York: Worthington, 1884), p. 252Trans.]
182
 183
reputation, power and money. These give the idle person enough trouble [275] and provide him with much to do about nothing, so that the interest which he takes in it is an
interest of mere delusion. Nature really plays with the person and spurs him (the subject) on to its 59 purpose, although the person is convinced (objectively) that he pursues his
own purpose. Such inclinations of delusion, just because fantasy acts as a self-creator in them, are well suited to become highly passionate, especially when they are intended for
competition between human beings.60
Boys' games, like playing ball, wrestling, running races, and playing soldier, or men's games, like playing chess or cards (one of these activities gives full preference to the
understanding, whereas the other also stresses profit), and, finally, the games of the townsman who tries to make his fortune with faro or dice are altogether daring enterprises
deliberately spurred on by the wisdom of Nature so that they all test their strength in a competition with others. Actually this is done so that the force of life is prevented from
weakening and is kept strong instead. Two such contenders believe they are playing between themselves; but in reality nature plays with both of them. Reason can clearly
convince them of this fact if they consider how badly the means they have selected are suited to their purpose. But satisfaction arising from this excitement, just because it is
closely related to ideas of delusion (though ill-judged), is for this very reason the cause of a propensity to the strongest and longest-lasting passion.*
Inclinations to delusion make the weak man superstitious and the superstitious man weak, that is, they make him inclined to expect interesting results from circumstances which
cannot be natural causes at all
* A man in Hamburg, who had gambled away considerable wealth in that city, now spent his time watching the players. Someone asked him how he feels when he thinks of
having once had such wealth. The man replied: "If I had possession of it again, I should not know how to use it in a more delightful way."
183
 184
(something to fear or something to hope for). Hunters, fishermen, and gamblers (particularly in the lottery) are superstitious; and the delusion which seduces us into imagining the
subjective to be the objective, and thereby taking the mood of the inner sense for knowledge of the thing itself, makes the propensity to superstition also conceivable.
[276] On the Highest Physical Good
§ 87. 61 The greatest sensuous pleasure, which is not accompanied by any loathing at all, is found under healthy conditions in resting after work. The propensity to rest without
previous labor is laziness. Nevertheless, a somewhat long refusal to return to one's business, and the indulgence in a sweet far niente62 for the purpose of regaining strength, is not
yet laziness, because (even in play) one can be occupied pleasurably and usefully at the same time. Even changing the type of work as to its specific nature is a varied recreation,
whereas it takes a rather strong determination to return to hard work which has been left unfinished.
Among the three vices of laziness, cowardice, and deceit, the first appears to be most contemptible. In judging laziness, however, one may often do injustice to a person. For his
own well-being and that of others, Nature has wisely provided many a subject with a healthy instinct of distaste for continuous work. Man cannot tolerate any prolonged and
frequently repeated expenditure of energy without exhaustion; but rather he requires certain pauses for recreation. Not without good reason, Demetrius could have allotted an altar
to this fiend (laziness);63 because, if laziness did not intervene, then restless wickedness would cause far more trouble in this world than it already does. If cowardice did not have
pity on man, then belligerent bloodthirst would soon annihi184
 185late him; and if there were no deceit (for among the many scoundrels united through conspiracy, for example, in a regiment, there will always be one to betray it), then, because of
the inborn wickedness of man, whole states would soon be overthrown.
The strongest motives of Nature, which take the place of reason (the ruler of the world), are love of life and love of the other sex. 64 By means of a higher reason they invisibly
provide the human race in general with the best physical state in the world, without making it necessary that human reason involve itself to that end. Love of life is to maintain the
individual, love of the other sex is to maintain the species. Through the general mixing of the sexes, the life of our species, which is endowed with reason, will be progressively
maintained, despite the fact that this species works intentionally on its own destruction (by war). This [277], however, does not keep the rational creatures of such a constantly
advancing culture, even in the midst of war, from promising to mankind in coming centuries an unequivocal prospect of bliss which will never end.65
On the Highest Ethicophysical Good
§ 88.66 The two kinds of good, the physical and the moral, cannot be mixed together, because they would then neutralize each other and have no effect on the purpose of true
bliss. Rather, inclination to pleasurable living and inclination to virtue are in conflict with each other, and the restriction of the principle of physical good by the principle of moral
good constitute through their very conflict the whole purpose of a well-bred, partly sensuous and partly ethicointellectual67 human being. But, since mixture can hardly be
avoided in practice, a dissolution by counteracting means (reagentia) are needed in order to know which elements exist in what
185
 186
proportion in this mixture which, if properly combined, can provide the enjoyment of civilized bliss.
The kind of thought characteristic of the union of good living and virtue in society is humaneness. The degree of good living does not matter here because one person demands
much and the other less of it according to what he deems necessary. What really counts, however, is the kind of relationship whereby the inclination to good living is curbed by
the law of virtue.
Sociability is also a virtue; but the inclination to be sociable often becomes a passion. But, if sociable enjoyment is boastfully heightened by squander, then this false sociability
ceases to be virtue, and becomes merely high living, injurious to humanity.
Music, dance, and play are conducive to company without conversation (because those few words which are needed for play establish no conversation which encourages a mutual
exchange of thought). Some people claim that play should serve only to fill out the emptiness of conversation [278] after dinner, but it is commonly made the principal affair. It is
used as a means of acquisition by which the emotions are strongly stirred, and where a certain habit of self-interest is established in order to plunder each other with the greatest
politeness. As long as the play lasts, nobody denies that complete egoism is determined to be the rule of conduct. Despite all that culture springing from those mannerisms, 68 such
conversation does not further the union of social good living with virtue, and, consequently, it would thereby hardly further the cause of true humaneness.
The good living which still seems to harmonize best with virtue is a good meal in good company (and if possible with alternating companions). Chesterfield says that the number
of companions must not be fewer than that of the Graces, nor more than that of the Muses.69*
* Ten per table, because the host, who serves the guests, does not count himself.
186
 187
When I think of companions for a dinner party to be composed solely of men of taste (aesthetically united),* who are not only interested in having a meal together but also in
enjoying one another, then this little dinner party (since their number cannot amount to many more than the number of the Graces) must not only try to supply physical
satisfactionwhich everyone can find for himselfbut also social enjoyment for which the dinner must appear only as a vehicle. If the number of participants is right, it need not be
feared 70 that the conversation will come to a standstill or that the guests will break up into small groups with those seated nearest them. The latter situation does not follow the
rules of taste which are always observed when one person speaks [279] to everybody (not only to one's neighbor). Those so-called festive entertainments (feasting and gorging),
on the other hand, are pretty much in bad taste. There can be no question that whatever is publicly said by an indiscreet table-companion at all dinner parties or even at an inn, to
the detriment of someone absent, should not be used outside this company and should not be gossiped about. Even without any special agreement any such gathering has a certain
sanctity and duty of secrecy about it in consideration of what embarrassment fellow members of the dinner party might be caused afterward. Without such confidence the
wholesome gratification of enjoying moral culture within society and of enjoying culture itself would be denied. Therefore, if something derogatory
* There are occasions at a festive table, where the presence of ladies automatically limits the freedom of the conversation to what is polite. Sometimes a sudden silence
threatens the conversation when no one dares to bring up a new subject suitable for keeping the conversation alive. People do not want to raise a new subject but rather they
prefer to make it interesting by relating it to the news of the day. A single person, particularly the lady of the house, can often all by herself avoid such a stagnation and keep
the conversation flowing, so that, as at a concert, the conversation can conclude with general and complete joyfulness, which makes it all so much more wholesome. It is likePlato's Symposium in which the guest said: "Your dinners are pleasing not only when one enjoys them, but also as often as one thinks of them."
187
 188
were said about my best friend in a so-called public company (even the largest dinner party is really always only a private party, whereas only a state dinner is public by
definition) I shall defend him; and, in any event, I shall, at my own risk, come to his aid with severity and bitterness of expression. But I shall not allow myself to become a tool
in spreading this evil report or in carrying it to the man concerned. Not merely social taste must guide the conversation, but also principles which are meant to serve the open
exchange of ideas among men within the limiting conditions of freedom.
There is something analogous to the confidence between men, who eat together at the same table, and 71 their familiarity with ancient customs like those of the Arab, with whom
a stranger may feel safe as soon as he has been able to obtain a refreshment (a drink of water) in the Arab's tent; or by accepting salt and bread offered by deputies coming to her
from Moscow, the Russian Czarina could regard herself as secure from all snares by the bond of hospitality. Eating together at the same table is regarded as formal evidence of
such a covenant of security.
Eating alone (solipsimus convictorii)72 is unhealthy for a philosophizing [280] man of learning;* it does not restore his powers but exhausts73 him (especially when it
* The philosophizing man must carry his thoughts continuously with him in order to find out by numerous experiments to what principles he should tie them systematically;
and ideas, because they are not intuitions, also float in the air and offer themselves to him. The historian or mathematician, on the other hand, can write down his thoughts and
ideas; and so, with his pen in hand, according to general rules of reason, he can arrange them empirically right away as facts. Because his thoughts and ideas have already
been arranged as to certain points, he can continue his work on the following day just where he left off. The philosopher must not be considered as a laborer working at the
building of a system of the sciences, that is, not in the way in which scholars are engaged, but rather he must be considered as an investigator of wisdom. It [A: HeEd.] is the
bare idea of a person which determines the final purpose of all practical and also theoretical knowledge. One cannot use the title philosopher in the plural, but only in the
singular (the philosopher judges such or such), because he determines the bare idea, wheras speaking of philosophers would imply a plurality of something that is an absolute
unity.
188
 189
becomes a solitary feasting); it turns into exhausting work, and not into the refreshing play of thoughts. The indulging person who wastes himself in self-consuming thought during
the solitary meal gradually loses his vivacity which, on the other hand, he would have gained if a table companion with alternative ideas had offered stimulation through new
material which he had not been able to dig up himself.
At a full dinner, where the multitude of courses is only intended to keep the guests together for a long time (coenam ducere), 74 the conversation usually goes through the three
stages of 1) narration, 2) reasoning, and 3) jesting. A. The first stage concerns the news of the day, first domestic, then foreign, received from personal letters and newspapers. B.
During the second stage, when this first appetite75 has been satisfied, the company gets livelier, because, in arguing back and forth, it is hard to avoid a variety of judgment about
one and the same object under discussion. Since no one has a low regard for his own judgment, a dispute arises which continues to whet the appetite for food and drink; and in
proportion to the liveliness of the dispute and the participation in it, the food is felt to be beneficial. C. In the third stage, because reasoning is always a kind of work and exertion
of energy, this finally becomes difficult after eating rather copiously during the dinner. Consequently, the conversation turns naturally to the mere play of wit, partly also to please
the lady [281] in the company who is encouraged by the minor, intentional, but not insulting attacks on her sex to shine in her own display of wit. Thus the meal ends with
laughter. Such laughter, if it is loud and good-natured, has ultimately been determined by nature to help the stomach in the digestive process by moving the diaphragm and
intestines, consequently76 contributing to the physical well-being. Meanwhile the participants in the dinner (how many, I do not know!) fancy that they have found culture of the
intellectone wonders how much!in the purpose of Nature. Dinner
189
 190
music at festive banquets of great gentlemen is the most tasteless absurdity that revelry has ever concocted.
A tastefully arranged dinner 77 that animates the company obeys the following rules: a) choose topics for conversation which interest everybody, and always give everyone a
chance to add something appropriate; b) do not allow deadly silence to fall, but permit only momentary pauses in the conversation; c) do not change the subject unnecessarily, nor
jump from one subject to another. The mind at the end of the meal, as at the end of a drama (the same applies to the entire life lived by a rational human being), inevitably looks
back on several phases of the conversation. If the mind cannot find a connecting thread, it feels confused and realizes with displeasure that it has not progressed in matters of
culture, but rather regressed. An entertaining subject must nearly be exhausted before one can pass on to another; and, when conversation stagnates, one must know how tosuggest skillfully, as an experiment, another related topic for conversation. In such a way one individual in the company can direct the conversation, unnoticed and unenvied. d)
Do not tolerate the beginning or continuation of anything dogmatic, neither for yourself nor the companions in the group. Rather, since this conversation ought not to be business
but merely a pastime, avoid such seriousness by means of a jest deftly introduced. e) In a serious conflict, that cannot be avoided, control yourself and your emotions carefully so
that mutual respect and good faith always prevail. What counts more is the tone (which must neither be ranting, nor arrogant), not the content of the conversation, so that none of
the guests should go home from the company at variance with another.
[282] No matter how insignificant these laws of refined humanity may seem, especially if you compare them with purely moral laws, then everything that furthers compan190
 191
ionship, even if it consists only of pleasant maxims or manners, is a dress that properly clothes virtue. Such a dress must also be recommended to virtue even in a serious context.
78 The cynic's purism and the hermit's mortification of the flesh, without social good-living, are distorted interpretations of virtue and do not make virtue attractive; rather, being
forsaken by the Graces, they can make no claim of humanity.
191
 193
PART TWO
ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTERIZATION
ON HOW TO KNOW A MAN'S INTERIOR FROM HIS EXTERIOR
193
 195
[285] Classification
1) The character of the person, 2) the character of the sex, 3) the character of the nation, 4) the character of the race, 5) the character of the species. 1
A. The Character of the Person
§ 89.2 In pragmatic consideration, the universal, natural (not civil) signification (semiotica universalis) of the word character is twofold; sometimes people say that a certain person
has this or that (physical) character; and sometimes people say that a person has simply character (a moral character) which defines him as an individual and no one else. The first
is man's mark of difference as a creature with senses or a being of Nature; the second is the distinguishing mark of a reasonable being endowed with freedom. The man of
principles has character. Of him we know definitely what to expect. He does not act on the basis of his instinct, but on the basis of his will. Therefore, without being redundant one
can classify characteristics according to a person's faculty of desire (what is practical), as a) his nature, or natural talent, b) his temperament, or disposition, and c) his general
character, or mode of thinking. The first two dispositions indicate what can be made of a person; the
195
 196
third (which is moral) shows what man is prepared to make of himself.
I. On Nature 3
To say that the human being has a good disposition means that he is not stubborn, but compliant; he may get angry, but can easily be appeased, [286] and will bear no grudge (he
is good in a negative way). But to be able to say of him that ''he has a good heart" does tell us more about him, although such a statement is also based on sense impressions. It is,
however, an incentive to the practical-good, even though such a characterization is not bestowed according to principles. Consequently, the good-humored and the good-hearted
are both people whom a crafty guest can use as he chooses. Accordingly, man's nature is conditioned (subjectively) more by the feeling of pleasure or displeasure, as to how oneperson is affected by another (and in this reaction may be found something characteristic), than (objectively) by the faculty of desire, wherein life manifests itself not merely in
feeling, that is, internally, but also in activity, that is, externally, though manifested merely in accordance with incentives pertinent to sensibility. Temperament exists in this
relation, and it must be distinguished from habitual disposition (which has been acquired by custom) because a habitual disposition is not a natural disposition, but only a result of
chance.
II. On Temperament4
When we speak of temperament from a physiological point of view, we mean physical constitution (the strong or weak build) and the complexion (the fluid moving regularly
through the body by virtue of the vital power, which also includes the heat or cold necessary for the treatment of these humors).
However, speaking of temperament from a psycho196
 197
logical point of view, when we mean the temperament of the soul (the faculty of feeling and desire), those terms borrowed from the constitution of the blood are understood as
having physically motivated causes (the principal of which is the blood) analogous to the play of feelings and desires.
Thus it follows that the temperaments, which we attribute only to the soul, may perhaps also be influenced mysteriously by the physical condition of a person. Furthermore, since,
first, they permit principal classification into temperaments of feeling and activity, and since, second, each of them can be linked with the excitability (intensio) or the slackening
(remissio) of the vital power, it follows that only four simple temperaments (similar to the four syllogistic figures through the medius-terminus) 5 can be established: the sanguine,
the melancholy, the choleric, and the phlegmatic. Hereby [287] the old forms can be retained;6 and only a more comfortable interpretation suited to the spirit of this doctrine of
temperaments needs to be offered.
Describing the constitution of the blood does not suffice to state the cause of phenomena observed in a sensuously affected person, even7 according to the pathology of humors or
nerves.8 Description can only classify phenomena according to observed effects. One does not need to know in advance what chemical blood-mixture it is that justifies the
designation of a certain property of temperament, but rather one has to know which feelings and inclinations one collects during the observation of the person, in order to place
him properly into a particular class.
The principal classification of the doctrine of temperaments can be the division into temperaments of feeling9 and temperaments of activity, and, by subdivision, the classification
can again be divided into two kinds which together provide us with the four temperaments.10 I count A. the sanguine, and its opposite, B. the melancholy among the temperaments
of feeling. The sanguine
197
 198
has the peculiarity that sense impressions are quick and strong, but not deeply penetrating (not of a lasting nature). On the other hand, in the melancholy, sense impressions are less
obvious but more deeply rooted. The distinction between the temperaments of feeling 11 must be assigned to this, and not to the propensity to joyfulness or sadness. The
lightheartedness of the sanguine disposes to gaiety; while heaviness of heart, which broods over a sense impression, deprives gaiety of its easy fluctuations, but still without
producing sadness. However, since every change, which one has under one's control stimulates and strengthens the mind, then the person who lightly bears everything that he
encounters is, if not wiser, at least certainly happier than the person who clings to impressions which benumb his vital power.
I. Temperaments of Feeling12
A. The Sanguine Temperament of the Light-Blooded
The sanguine person reveals his temperament as follows: He is carefree and full13 of expectation; he attributes great importance to [288] everything for the moment, and at the
next moment he may not give it another thought. He makes honest promises but fails to keep his word because he has not considered deeply enough beforehand whether he will be
able to keep them. He is good-natured enough to give help to others, but he is a poor debtor and always asks for new terms. He is a good companion, jocular, and high-spirited; he
does not like to attribute great importance to anything (Vive La bagatelle!),14 and he has everybody for a friend. Usually he is not a bad fellow, but as a delinquent he is hard to
convert; indeed, he repents of something very much, but quickly forgets this repentance (which is never an affliction to him). Business tires him, and yet he is restlessly busy with
things that are mere play, because this provides change, especially since perseverance is not his strength.
198
 199B. The Melancholy Temperament of the Heavy-Blooded
He who is disposed to melancholy (not the person afflicted with melancholy, since this signifies a condition, rather than the mere propensity to a condition), attributes great
importance to all things that concern him. Everywhere he finds cause for concern and he directs his attention first of all to difficulties, while the sanguine person relies on the hope
of success. Therefore the melancholy person thinks deeply, just as the sanguine thinks only superficially. He makes promises with reluctance because to him keeping his word is
precious, but the ability to keep his promise is problematic. All this does not arise from moral causes (because we are talking here about sensuous motives), but rather from
potential opposition which makes him uneasy, mistrusting, and critical, thereby also incapacitating him for joyfulness. Moreover, this mental disposition, when habitual, contrasts
with a philanthropist's disposition which is more akin to the sanguine person, at least in motive, because he who is himself deprived of joy will hardly be able to tolerate it in
others.
[289] II. Temperaments of Activity 15
C. The Choleric Temperament of the Hot-Blooded
We say of the choleric person that he is hot-tempered, and that he is quickly ablaze like a straw fire. He readily allows himself to be appeased if the other person is willing to give
in. He is still angry then, but he does not hate; on the contrary, he loves the other person all the more for giving in to him. His activity is impetuous, but not lasting. He is busy, but
reluctant to undertake business himself, just because he is not persistent. He likes to be the chief who makes the decisions, but does not like to carry them out. Consequently, his
domi199
 200
nant passion is ambition; he likes to be involved with public affairs and wants to be loudly praised. Accordingly he is fond of appearance and the pomp of formalities; he gladly
plays the role of protector, and is magnanimous as appearances go, though not magnanimous out of love but from pride, because he loves himself most. 16 He values order highly
and consequently appears smarter than he is. He is avaricious in order not to be stingy; he is polite, but because of his emphasis on ceremony, he is stiff and affected in society. He
likes any flatterer who is the butt of his wit; he suffers more offenses from the opposition of others to his haughty arrogance than the miser ever suffers from the opposition
against his avaricious arrogance, especially since a bit of caustic wit directed at him will completely dispel the aura of his importance, whereas the miser is compensated for this by
his profit. In short, the choleric temperament is the least happy of all, because it calls most strongly for opposition against itself.
D. The Phlegmatic Temperament of the Cold-Blooded
Phlegm17 signifies apathy, not indolence (inertia), and on that account one should not call a person who has much phlegm a phlegmatic, or lethargic, and thereby classify him in
the group of idlers.18
Phlegm, as a weakness, is the tendency to inactivity, it is not letting oneself be moved to business even by strong motives. Such insensitivity to stimuli [290] is voluntary
uselessness, all inclinations are directed only to the satisfaction of hunger and to sleep.
Phlegm as a strength, on the other hand, is characteristic of not being stirred easily or quickly, but, if slowly, then persistently. He who has a good dose of phlegm in him warms
up slowly; but he holds the warmth longer. He does not get angry easily; he first considers whether he should become angry. The choleric person on the other hand, may fall into a
rage just because he has
200
 201
found himself unable to stir the resolute man out of his cold-bloodedness.
The cold-blooded person has nothing to regret particularly if he has been equipped by nature with a rather average share of reason, in addition to his phlegm; without being
brilliant, he will still proceed from principles and not from instinct. His fortunate temperament takes the place of wisdom, and even in ordinary life people often call him the
philosopher. By virtue of this temperament he is superior to others without offending their vanity. Frequently he is also called cunning, because all the bullets and missiles fired at
him bounce off him as from a sack of wool.
He is a peaceable husband and knows how to establish authority over his wife and relatives by seemingly humoring everyone. By his firm but well-considered will he knows how
to make others follow him, just as bodies with small mass and great velocity penetrate other bodies on impact, and just as bodies with less velocity and greater mass carry along
with themselves the obstacle that stands in their path without destroying it.
If one temperament is said to be an associate of another, as it is commonly believed, for example, thenthey either oppose or else neutralize each other. They oppose each other if the sanguine is considered united with the melancholy, [291] and likewise if the choleric is
201
 202
thought to be united with the phlegmatic in one and the same subject, because they (A and B, likewise C and D) stand in opposition to each other. If the sanguine were mixed
(chemically, so to speak) with the choleric, and the melancholic with the phlegmatic (A and C, likewise B and D), then they would neutralize each other. Good-natured joyfulness
cannot be conceived as being fused with forbidding anger in one and the same act, nor can the agony of the self-tormentor go together with the peaceful serenity of the selfsufficient mind. But if one of these two states should alternate with the other in the same person, the result would be a mere freak, but no specific temperament.
Therefore there is no composite temperament like a sanguine-choleric temperament (which all windbags want to have because then they can claim not only to play the role of the
gracious but also the stern gentleman). In all there are but four temperaments, and each of them is simple. We do not know what to make of the person who claims to have a
mixture of temperaments.
Happiness and recklessness, melancholy and insanity, high-mindedness and stubbornness, finally cold-bloodedness and feeblemindedness are only distinguished as effects of
temperament in relation to their causes. 19*
* What influence the variety of temperament has upon public affairs, or vice versa (the effect which the customary exercise of affairs has on the temperament), is claimed to
have been discovered partly by experience and partly also by conjecture of assumed occasional causes. Thus, for example, it is said that
In religion the choleric is Orthodox,
the sanguine is Free-spirit,
the melancholy is Enthusiast,
the phlegmatic is Indifferentist.
But these are hastily written judgments which have as much value for the topic of Characteristic as a scurrilous wit will allow (vale [a]nt, quantum possunt [they are worth as
much as is attributed to themEd.]).
202
 203
III. On Character as a Way of Thinking 20
If we are simply able to say of a person "He has character," then we not only tell much about him, but we also praise him, for he is a rarity that calls for respect and admiration
[292] as well.
If one usually understands by character those qualities which accurately describe a person, be they good or bad, it is customarily added that he has this or that character; in that
case the term refers to his way of sensing. But simply to have a character relates to that property of the will by which the subject has tied himself to certain practical principles
which he has unalterably prescribed for himself by his own reason. Although these principles may sometimes indeed be false or defective, nevertheless the formal element of the
will as such, which is determined to act according to firm principles (not shifting hither and yon like a swarm of gnats), has something precious and admirable21 to it, which is
also something rare.
Here it does not depend on what Nature makes of man, but what man makes of himself. What Nature makes of man belongs to temperament (wherein the subject is for the mostpart passive), and only what man makes of himself reveals whether he has character.
All other good and useful properties of character have a price in exchange for others which have just as much use. Talent has a market price, since the sovereign or estate-owner
can use a talented person in all sorts of ways. Temperament has a fancy price,22 since one can converse well with such a person; he is a pleasant companion. But, character has an
inner value* and it is above all price.
* Once a seafarer had occasion to listen to a dispute led by learned men concerning the rank of their respective faculties. He decided the question in his own way, namely:
How much would a captured man bring at the sale in the market in Algiers? No one would need a theologian or a jurist in that
(footnote continued on the next page)
203
 204
[293] On the Qualities which Result from Having or not Having Character 23
1. The imitator (as far as morals are concerned) is without character, because character has its being in the originality of the mode of thinking. The conduct of character is based on
a source which the person himself has discovered. However, the rational person must not be an eccentric; indeed he never will be, because he depends upon principles that are
valid for everybody. The eccentric only mimics a person who has character. Kindness arising from temperament is a painting of watercolors and not a trait of character. But,
depicted in caricature, a trait of character is an outrageous ridicule of the man of true character, because he does not indulge in the evil conduct which has become public custom
(the fashion), and, consequently, he is represented as an eccentric.
2. However, being temperamentally bad-natured is less bad than being temperamentally good-natured without character, because by character we can get the upper hand over bad
nature. A person of bad character (like Sulla),24 even though the violence of his strict maxims provokes disgust, is, nevertheless, also an object of admi-
(footnote continued from the previous page)
place; but the physician has learned a trade and might have a cash value. King James I of England was besought by the wet-nurse who had suckled him, that he should
make her son a gentleman (a man of distinction). James replied: "That I cannot do; I can make him a count, but he must make himself a gentleman." Diogenes (the Cynic),
as the story goes, was captured on a sea voyage near the island of Crete and offered for sale at a public slave market. "What can you do? What do you know?" asked the
broker who had put him upon the stand. "I know how to rule," answered the philosopher, "and you better find a buyer who needs a master." The merchant, moved by this
unusual request, decided to participate in this strange transaction. He turned his son over to Diogenes for the purpose of education; he told Diogenes to make of him
whatever he wished. The merchant himself had to conduct business in Asia for several years and upon his return he received his heretofore uncivilized son now
transformed into a skillful, well-mannered, and virtuous person. Thus approximately can the gradation of human worth be appraised.
204
 205
ration, because we generally admire strength of soul in comparison with kindness of soul. Both must be found united in the same subject in order to bring out what is more ideal
than real, namely, the right to the title of magnanimity.
3. The rigid, inflexible 25 temper which accompanies a resolution (as was the case with Charles XII)26 is indeed a natural disposition very favorable to the character, but it is not
yet a particular character as such. Character requires maxims, which proceed from reason and from ethicopractical principles. Therefore one cannot properly say that the
wickedness of this person is a quality of his character, because then it would be diabolic. Man never sanctions the evil in himself, and so there is actually no evil coming from
principles, but only from the forsaking of them. [294] Accordingly, it is best to explain negatively those principles which have to do with character. They are:
a) Not to speak an untruth intentionally; consequently, we should also speak with caution in order that we do not bring upon ourselves the disgrace of retracting.
b) Not to dissemble; that is, to appear well-intentioned to one's face, but hostile behind one's back.
c) Not to break one's (legitimate) promise; this includes honoring the memory of a friendship that has now deteriorated, and not misusing afterward the former confidence and
candor of the other person.
d) Not to join the company of evil-minded people, and, bearing in mind the noscitur ex socio etc.,27 to confine the association only to business.
e) Not to pay attention to slander derived from people's shallow and malicious28 judgment, because listening to it205
 206
already indicates weakness. Also, to restrain 29 our fear of a breach of etiquette which, again, is a fleeting, changeable thing; and, if its influence has already acquired some
weight, not to extend its command over morality.30
The person who is conscious of the character in his mode of thinking does not have that character by nature, but must always have acquired it. One may also take it for granted
that the establishment of character is, similar to a kind of rebirth, a certain solemn resolution which the person himself makes. This resolution and the moment at which the
transformation took place remain unforgettable for him, like the beginning of a new epoch. This stability and persistence in principles can generally not be effected by education,
examples, and instruction by degrees, but it can only be done by an explosion which suddenly occurs as a consequence of our disgust at the unsteady condition of instinct. Perhaps
there will be only a few who have attempted this revolution before their thirtieth year, and fewer still who have firmly established it before their fortieth year. Wishing to become
a better person in a fragmentary manner is a vain endeavor because one impression fades away while we labor on another. [295] The establishment of a character, however, is
absolute unity of the inner principle of conduct as such. Also, it is said that poets have no character, for example, they would rather insult their best friends than give up a bright
idea; or that character cannot be found at all among courtiers who have to accommodate themselves to all fashions; and to clergymen who pay homage both to the Lord of Heaven
and to the lords of the earth in the identical mood, stability of character can only be doubtfully attributed; and, accordingly, it probably is and will remain a pious wish to assume
that they have an inner (moral) character. But perhaps the philosophers31 must be blamed, because they have never yet singled out this concept and shed a sufficiently clear light
on it. They
206
 207
have tried to represent virtue only in fragments, but never have they tried to make virtue interesting as a whole to all people in its beautiful form.
Briefly, as the highest maxim, uninhibited internal truthfulness toward oneself, as well as in the behavior toward everyone else, is the only proof of a person's consciousness of
having character. And since having character is the minimum requirement that can be expected of a rational person, and at the same time also the maximum of his inner value (of
human dignity), then being a man of principle (having a certain character) must be possible for the most ordinary human mind that can 32 thereby be superior to the greatest talent,
thanks to dignity.
On Physiognomy33
Physiognomy is the art34 of judging a person's disposition or way of thinking by his visible form; consequently, it judges the interior by the exterior. Here one does not judge him
in his unhealthy, but in his healthy condition; not when his mind is stirred up, but when it is quiet. When someone, who is being judged for this purpose, realizes that someone is
watching him and seeking to detect his inner nature, it goes without saying that his mind is not at rest but in a state of constraint, internal agitation, and indeed even in a state of
annoyance at seeing himself under scrutiny by someone else.
If a clock is in a fine case (says a famous clockmaker), one cannot judge with certainty from this that the inside is also of good quality; but, if the case is badly constructed, one
can [296] conclude with reasonable certainty that the inside is not worth much either, because the craftsmen will not discredit a product on which he has worked diligently and
well by neglecting its exterior, which costs him the least labor. However, it would be absurd to conclude that, by analogy to the human craftsman, the same holds true for the
inscrutable creator
207
 208
of Nature; that He would have combined a beautiful body with a good soul in order to recommend the person, whom He created, to other persons and so bring him into favor, or,
vice versa, scare them away (by means of the hic niger est, hunc tu, Romane, caveto). 35 Taste, which merely expresses the subjective basis of satisfaction or dissatisfaction of one
person with another (depending upon their beauty or ugliness), cannot serve as a model for wisdom. Wisdom shares (with a purpose which we cannot absolutely comprehend) its
existence objectively with certain natural qualities, but it is wrong to assume that these two heterogeneous things36 are united in a person for one and the same purpose.
On How Nature Guides Us to Physiognomy
If we are to put ourselves into somebody's hands, it is only natural that we first look him in the face and particularly in the eyes, no matter how well-recommended he comes to us.
We want to find out what we have to be on guard against. His repelling or attractive gestures determine our choice, or also37 make us suspicious even before we have come to
conclusions about his morals. Hence it cannot be disputed that there is characterization by physiognomy. Yet it can never become a science, because the peculiarity of a human
form, which indicates certain inclinations or faculties of the subject under consideration, cannot be understood by terminological description. It can only be done through imagesand representation (by intuition)38 or through imitation, whereby the human form in general is judged according to its varieties, every one of which is supposed to point to a
special inner quality of the person.
The caricatures of human heads by Baptista Porta have long been forgotten. They represent animal heads painted in analogy to certain characteristic human facial traits, and from
these pictures conclusions were to be
208
 209
drawn about a similarity of [297] natural predispositions in both. Lavater popularized this taste by silhouettes which were well-liked and cheap merchandise for some time, but
recently they have been entirely abandoned. Almost nothing remains of this except, perhaps, the ambiguous observation (of Herr von Archenholz) that the face of a person, which
we may only imitate for ourselves by making a grimace, also calls forth certain thoughts or sensations, which agree with the imitated person's character. Thus there is now no
longer any demand for physiognomy as an art of investigating the human interior through external, involuntary signs, and nothing is left of it but the art of cultivating taste, not
taste in things, but rather in morals, manners, and customs, in order to add to the knowledge of man through a critique which would enhance human relations and the knowledge
of man in general.
Classification of Physiognomy 39
On characteristics: 1) in the structure of the face; 2) in its features; 3) in habitual expression (mien).
A. On the Structure of the Face
It is remarkable that in statues, cameos, and intaglios the Greek artists also had in their minds an ideal of the structure of the face (for gods and heroes), which was to express
perpetual youth and at the same time a repose free from all emotions. This quality speaks from their statues,40 cameos, and intaglios without the superaddition of any alluring
charms. The Greek perpendicular profile has the eyes set deeper than they ought to be according to our taste (which looks for charm); even the Venus dei Medici lacks charm. The
cause of this may be that, since the ideal should be a definite, unchangeable
209
 210
norm, a nose springing out of the face from the forehead at an angle (the angle may be larger or smaller) would yield no definite rule of form as required of that which belongs to
the norm. The later Greeks, despite their beautiful physical build, do not have in relation to the shape of the rest of the body [298] that severe perpendicular profile in their faces,
which seems to prove that these ideal facial structures found in works of art 41 were prototypes. In imitation of these mythological models, the eyes have become more deeply set,
and they have been placed slightly in the shade at the base of the nose. Nowadays, however, one deems human faces more beautiful that have a nose with a slight deviation from
the direction of the forehead (an indentation at the base of the nose).
If we pursue our observations of how people actually are, it is apparent that a strictly measured adherence to the rule generally signifies a very ordinary person who has no spirit.
The happy mean appears to be the basic measure and the foundation of beauty, but it is still far from being beauty itself, because something characteristic is needed for beauty. But
one can encounter this characteristic even in a face without beauty, in which expression is of advantage to the owner, though in some other respect (perhaps moral or aesthetic).
One may, for instance, find fault with a beautiful face, with a slightly too narrow forehead, with a broad chin, or with the color of the hair,42 and so forth, but one has to admit
that this still remains more favorable to the individuality of the person than if regularity were complete, because this would generally also cause lack of character.
We should not charge any face with ugliness if in its characteristics it does not betray the expression of a mind degraded by vice or by a natural, though unfortunate, tendency to
vice, for example, a certain characteristic of a person who has the tendency of sneering maliciously when he speaks, or of looking another person straight in
210
 211
the face with foolhardiness untempered by gentleness when he tries to convey that one does not take his judgment seriously. There are men whose faces are rébarbaratif 43 (as the
Frenchman says); they have faces with which, it is said, one can drive children to bed; others have faces pockmarked and grotesque, or others who have, as the Dutch say, a
wanschapenes face (a face perceived in delirium or in a dream). Nevertheless, people with such faces still show such good-naturedness and gaiety that they can make fun of their
own faces, which therefore cannot be called ugly, because they would not be offended if a lady said of them (as was said of Pelisson44 at the Académie Française): ''Pelisson
abuses the privilege men have of being ugly." It is more mischievous and at the same time45 more stupid when persons, from whom one can [299] expect correct behavior, behave
like rabble by reproaching a handicapped person with his physical defects which often enhance his intellectual excellence. If this happens to one who has suffered an accidentduring early childhood (for example, if he is called "you blind dog," or "you lame dog"), such pronouncements are really wicked, and gradually embitter him toward well-formed
people who imagine themselves to be superior.
Generally, people who have never left their country make fun of unfamiliar faces of strangers from other nations. Japanese children follow Dutch tradesmen, calling out: "What
big eyes, what big eyes!" The Chinese react with aversion to the red hair of some Europeans who visit their country, while their blue eyes seem ridiculous to them.
The observations concerning only the skull and its structure which constitutes the basis of its shape, for example, the skulls of Negroes, Kalmucks,46 South-Sea Indians, and so
forth, as they have been described by Camper47 and especially by Blumenbach,48 belong more to physical geography than to pragmatic anthropology. A
211
 212
mean just between the two might be the observation that even the forehead of the male of our species is customarily flat, while that of the female is rather rounded.
Whether a hump on the nose reveals a satirist; whether the peculiarity of the shape of the Chinese face, of which we say that the upper jawbone projects somewhat beyond the
lower, is an indication of their rigid minds; or whether the forehead of the American Indian, overgrown with hair on both sides, is a sign of an innate mental weakness, and so
forth; all these are conjectures which permit only inconclusive interpretation.
B. On Characteristics in Facial Features 49
It does no harm to a man, even in the judgment of the feminine sex, if his face has been disfigured and made unlovely because of the coloring of his skin or pockmarks. If goodnaturedness shines in his eyes, and also if the expression of decency reveals itself on his face peacefully together with the consciousness of his power, then he can always be liked
and be worthy of love; and this should be universally so regarded. One jokes with such people and their amiability (per antiphrasin); [300] and a woman can be proud of having
such a husband. Such a face is not a caricature,50 since a caricature is an intentionally exaggerated sketch (a distortion) of a face in excitement, devised for derision and belonging
to mimicry. Such a face51 must rather be counted as a variety inherent in nature, and must not be called a grotesque face (which would be terrifying). Without being beautiful
such a face can inspire love, and although it is not lovely, it is still not ugly.*
* Heidegger, a German musician in London, was fantastically deformed, but a clever and intelligent person with whom aristocrats liked to associate for the sake of
conversation. Once it occurred to him at a drinking party to claim to a lord that he had the ugliest face in London. The lord reflected and then made a wager that he would
present a face still more ugly. He then sent for a drunken woman, at whose appearance the whole party burst into laughter and shouts: "Heidegger, you have lost the wager!"
"Not so fast," he
(footnote continued on the next page)
212
 213
C. On Characteristics in Facial Expressions 52
Expressions are facial features put into action, and this action is controlled more or less by strong emotion, the tendency to such emotion is a trait of the person's character.
It is difficult to hide the impact of emotion from some facial expression; emotion53 betrays itself by the careful restraint from gesticulation, or in the tone itself. And he who is too
weak to control his emotion, will reveal his inner emotions through facial expression (much against his will), even if he would rather like to hide and conceal them from the eyes
of others. Once they have been found out, those who have mastered this art are not considered the best people to deal with in confidence, particularly when they know how to fake
expressions which contradict their real actions.
[301] The art of interpreting facial expressions which unintentionally reveal the interior, but which are used to deceive, can offer occasion for many proper remarks, but I wish to
consider only one. When anybody who ordinarily is not cross-eyed tells a story and looks at the point of his nose and consequently looks cross-eyed, then the story he is telling is
always a lie. But one must not count in this category anyone who squints because of defective eyesight, because he can be entirely free from this vice.
Moreover, there are gestures designed by nature, by which people of all races and from all climates understand each other without prior agreement. Among these
(footnote continued from the previous page)
_________
replied, "let the woman wear my wig, and let me wear her headdress; then we shall see." As this took place, everybody fell to laughing, to the point of suffocation, because thewoman looked like a very presentable gentleman, and the fellow looked like a witch. This shows that in order to call anyone beautiful, or at least bearably pretty, one must not
judge absolutely, but always only relatively. It also shows that no one ought to call a fellow ugly just because he is not handsome. Only repulsive physical defects of the face
can justify such a verdict (A: such a claimEd.].
213
 214
gestures are nodding the head (in affirmation), shaking the head (in negation), lifting up the head (in objection), shaking the head (in wonder), turning up one's nose (in mockery),
smiling ironically (in grinning), having one's countenance fall (upon the refusal of a request), knitting the brows (in vexation), rapidly snapping and locking the jaws (bah!),
beckoning toward and away from oneself with the hands, throwing up one's arms (in astonishment), clenching the fist (in threatening), bowing, laying a finger on the mouth
(compescere labella) 54 in order to command silence, hissing, and so forth.
Random Remarks55
Often-repeated facial expressions, which involuntarily accompany emotion, gradually become fixed features which only disappear in death. Consequently, as Lavater noticed, the
terrifying face that revealed the scoundrel in life refines itself (negatively) in death. Because all muscles are relaxed in death, nothing remains but the expression of repose, which
is an innocent expression. Thus it may even happen that a person who has not worn himself out during his youthful years, in later years, despite his good health, may take on a
new face because of debauchery. From this, however, nothing should be concluded about his natural disposition.
One also speaks of a common face in contrast to one that is aristocratic. The aristocratic signifies nothing more than an arrogant importance combined with a courtly manner of
ingratiation, as it prospers only in big cities where people cause friction among each other and wear off their crudeness. Therefore, when civil servants, born and brought up in the
country, are transferred with their families to important municipal positions, [302] or when they only qualify for such service in accordance with their rank, they show something
common, not merely in their manners, but also in their facial expression. Having dealt almost entirely with their subordi214
 215
nates, they felt unchallenged in their sphere of activity, so that their facial muscles did not develop the flexibility necessary for all situations involving the treatment of superiors,
inferiors, and equals. They would not have lost their dignity if they had stooped to cultivate the play of facial expressions which is required in order to be well received in society.
On the other hand, people accustomed to urban manners and who are of the same rank are well aware that they have an advantage in this respect over other people. When this
consciousness of superiority becomes habitual by long practice, it is stamped upon their faces with lasting outlines.
Devotees of a predominant religion or cult, when disciplined for a long time in mechanical exercises of devotion and, so to speak, petrified by them, attribute characteristics to the
people of an entire nation which became representative of that nation's physiognomy. Herr Fr. Nicolai 56 says this of the awkward, hypocritically pious faces in Bavaria; whereas
John Bull of old England, wherever he may go, carries in his face the license to be impolite to strangers, be it either abroad or in his own country. There is, therefore, something
like a national physiognomy, but it should not necessarily be thought of as innate. There are characteristic marks in groups of people whom the law has brought together for the
purpose of punishment. About the prisoners in Amsterdam's Rasphuis, Paris' Bicêtre, and London's Newgate, an able traveling German physician has remarked that they were
mostly skinny fellows who were conscious of their superiority. But there were none about whom it would be permissible to say with the actor Quin:57 "If this fellow is not a
scoundrel, then the Creator does not write a legible hand." In order to pass such hard judgment, we would need to distinguish, more clearly than any mortal can presume to claim,
between the purposes of the game that Nature plays with the forms of its creation only to generate a variety of temperaments, and what this does or does not do for morality.
215
 216
[303] B. The Character of the Sexes 58
All machines, designed to accomplish with little59 power as much as those with great power, must be designed with art. Consequently, one can assume beforehand that Nature's
foresight has put more art into the design of the female than the male, because Nature has equipped the male with greater strength than the female in order to bring both, who are
also rational beings, together in intimate physical union for the most innate purpose, the preservation of the species. Moreover, for this capacity of theirs (as rational animals)
Nature provided them with social inclinations so that their sexual partnership would persist in a domestic union.
A harmonious and indissoluble union cannot be achieved through the random combination of two persons. One partner must subject himself to the other, and, alternately, one must
be superior to the other in something, so that he can dominate or rule. If two people, who cannot do without each other, have identical ambitions, self-love will produce nothing
but wrangling. In the interest of the progress of culture, one partner must be superior to the other in a heterogeneous way. The man must be superior to the woman in respect tohis physical strength and courage, while the woman must be superior to the man in respect to her natural talent for mastering his desire for her. Under still uncivilized conditions,
on the other hand, superiority is on the man's side only. Therefore in anthropology the nature of feminine characteristics, more than those of the masculine sex, is a subject for
study by philosophers. Under adverse natural conditions one can no more recognize those characteristics than the characteristics of crab apples or wild pears, which disclose their
potential only through grafting or innoculation. Civilization does not establish these feminine characteristics, it only causes them to develop and become recognizable under
favorable circumstances.
216
 217
Feminine traits 60 are called weaknesses. People joke about them; fools ridicule them; but reasonable persons see very well that those traits are just the tools for the management
of men, and for the use of men for female designs. The man is easy to fathom; but the woman [304] does not reveal her secret, although she keeps another person's secret poorly
(because of her loquacity). He loves domestic peace and gladly submits to her rule, so that he does not find himself hindered in his own affairs. She does not shy away from
domestic strife which she carries on with her tongue, and for which Nature has provided her with loquacity and passionate eloquence which together61 disarm the man. He builds
on the right of the stronger to give orders at home because he has the obligation to protect his home against outside enemies. She builds on the right of the weaker to be protected
by her masculine partner against men, and she disarms him with her tears of exasperation by reproaching him with his lack of generosity.
In primitive cultures this is quite different.62 There the woman is a domestic animal. The man leads the way with weapon in his hand, and the woman follows him, laden with his
household belongings. But even in a barbaric civilization with legal polygamy, the most favored woman in the prison-yard (called harem) knows how to win control over a man;
and he has his hands full with bringing about a tolerable peace in the quarrel of many women about the one63 (who is to dominate him).
In a civil society the woman does not submit herself without marriage to the desires of a man, and if she is married, then only in monogamy. Where civilization has not yet
reached the level of feminine freedom in gallantry (that is, where the wife may openly admit to having lovers other than her husband), the man punishes the wife who threatens
him with a rival.* But when gallantry
* The old Russian story that wives suspect their husbands of keeping company with other women unless they are beaten now and then, is usually considered to be a fable.
However, in Cook's travel book one finds that
(footnote continued on the next page)
217
 218
has become fashionable and jealousy ridiculous (as happens when a certain degree of luxury is reached), [305] the feminine character reveals itself. By extending favors toward
men, the feminine character lays claim to freedom and simultaneously to the conquest of the entire male species. Although this inclination is in ill repute, under the name of
coquetry, it is not without a real justifiable basis. A young wife is always in danger of becoming a widow, and this leads her to distribute her charms to all men whose fortunes
make them marriageable; so that, if this should occur, she would not be lacking in suitors.
Pope 64 believes that one can characterize the feminine sex (the cultivated element of it, of course) under two headings, the inclination to dominate and the inclination to gratify.
By the latter, however, must not be understood gratification at home, but gratification in public, which can work to her advantage and distinction. Then the inclination to gratify
also dissolves into the inclination to dominate, and instead of giving in to her rivals' preoccupation with gratifying, she conquers all of them with her taste and her charm, wherever
possible. However, even the inclination to dominate, like any inclination, cannot be used for characterizing the relationship of one class of people to another. The inclination to
what is beneficial to them is common to all people; and the same also holds true for the inclination to dominate, as far as this is possible. Consequently, inclination
(footnote continued from the previous page)
when an English sailor on Tahiti saw an Indian chastising his wife, the sailor, wanting to be gallant, began to threaten the husband. The woman immediately turned against
the Englishman and asked him how it concerned him that her husband had to do this! Accordingly, one will also find that when the married woman practices obvious
gallantry and her husband pays no attention to it, but rather compensates himself with drinking parties, card games, or with gallantry of his own, then not merely contempt
but also hate overcomes the feminine partner, because the wife recognizes by this that he does not value her any longer, and that he leaves her indifferently to others, who
also want to gnaw at the same bone. [On margin of MS: The woman wishes to be liked by all men, because if her husband should die, she will set her hopes on another
man who likes herEd.]
218
 219does not characterize people. The fact that this female species is in a continual feud with its own kind, whereas it remains on rather good terms with the opposite sex, could be
taken for a characteristic if it were not merely the natural consequence of rivalry among women for the favor and devotion of men. The inclination to dominate is the real goal,
while public gratification, by which the field of their charm is extended, is only the means for providing the effect for that inclination.
We can only succeed in characterizing the feminine sex if we use the principle which served as Nature's end in the creation of femininity, and not what we 65 have devised
ourselves as its end. Since this end must still be wisdom according to Nature's design, despite the foolishness of men, these assumed ends will also be able to reveal their
underlying principle which does not depend on our own choice, but on the higher design for the human race. These ends are 1) the preservation of the species, [306] 2) the
improvement of society and its refinement by women.
1. As Nature entrusted to the woman's womb her most precious pledge, namely, the species, in the shape of the embryo by which the race was to propagate and perpetuate itself,
Nature was concerned about the preservation of the embryo and implanted fear into the woman's character, a fear of physical injury and a timidity toward similar dangers. On the
basis of this weakness, the woman legitimately asks for masculine protection.
2. Since Nature also wanted to instill the finer sensations, such as sociability and propriety, which belong to the culture, she made this sex the ruler of men through modesty and
eloquence in speech and expression. Nature made women mature early and had them demand gentle and polite treatment from men, so that they would find themselves
imperceptibly fettered by a child due to their own magnanimity; and they would find themselves
219
 220
brought, if not quite to morality itself, then at least to that which cloaks it, moral behavior, which is the preparation and introduction to morality.
Random Remarks 66
The woman wants to dominate, the man wants to be dominated (particularly before marriage). This was the reason for the gallantry of medieval knights. Early in life, the woman
acquires confidence in her ability to please. The young man always manages to displease and, consequently, is embarrassed (feels awkward) in the company of ladies. By virtue of
her sex, she maintains a feminine haughtiness in order to restrain all importunities of men through the respect which haughtiness instills; and she claims the privilege of respect
even without deserving it. The woman is unwilling; the man is insistent; her yielding is a favor. Nature wants that the woman be sought after; therefore she does not have to be so
particular in her choice (in matters of taste) as the man, whom Nature has built more coarsely, and who already pleases the woman if only his physique shows that he has the
strength and ability to protect her. If she were repelled with respect to the beauty of his body, and fastidious in her choice, then she would have to do the courting in order to fall
in love; while he would have to show himself unwilling. This would entirely degrade the dignity of her sex, even in the eyes of the man. [307] She must appear cold, while the
man must appear ardently in love. Not to respond to an amorous advance seems to be shameful to a man, whereas responding readily appears outrageous to a woman. A woman's
desire to let her charms play upon all gentlemen is coquetry; whereas boasting of being in love with all women is gallantry. Coquetry and gallantry may both be merely
fashionable affectations without any serious consequence. This was the case with cicisbeism,67 an unnatural freedom of the
220
 221
married woman, or with the courtesan system which previously also existed in Italy (in the Historia Concilii Tridentini it is reported, among other things; Erant ibi etiam 300
honestae meretrices, quas cortegianas vocant). 68 It is said about the courtesan system that it contained more cultural refinement as to moral public behavior than was contained in
mixed company in private houses. In marriage the husband woos only his own wife, but the wife has an inclination for all men. Out of jealousy she dresses up only for the eyes of
her own69 sex, order to outdo other women in charm or pretended distinguished appearance. The man, on the other hand, dresses up only for the feminine sex; if this can be called
dressing, it goes only so far as not to shame his wife by his clothes. The man judges feminine mistakes leniently, whereas the woman judges very severely (in public); and young
ladies, if they had the choice to have their trespasses judged by a male or a female jury, would certainly choose a male jury for their judge. Whenever the refinement of luxury has
reached a high point, the woman shows herself well-behaved only by compulsion, and makes no secret in wishing that she might rather be a man, so that she could give larger and
freer latitude to her inclinations; no man, however, would want to be a woman.
The woman does not ask about the man's continence before marriage; whereas to him the woman's continence is infinitely important. In marriage, women mock at men's
intolerance (jealousy), but it is only done by them jokingly; the unmarried woman, however, passes judgment on intolerance with great seriousness. As for scholarly women, they
use their books somewhat like a watch, that is, they wear the watch so it can be noticed that they have one, although it is usually broken or does not show the correct time.70
Feminine virtue or vice is very different from masculine virtue or vice, not only in kind but also in motive. She is expected to be patient; he must be tolerant. She is sensitive; he is
perceptive.71 The man's business [308] is
221 222
to earn; the woman's is to save. The man is jealous when he is in love; the woman is also jealous without being in love, because any lover gained by other women is one lost from
the circle of her admirers. The man develops his own taste while the woman makes herself an object of everybody's taste. ''What the world says is true, and what it does is good"
is a feminine principle which is hard to relate with character in the narrow sense of the word. However, there have been valiant women who, in connection with their own
household, have developed their specific and proper character with honor. Milton was encouraged by his wife to take the position of Latin Secretary, which was offered to him
after Cromwell's death, although it was contrary to his principles now to declare a regime lawful which he had previously labeled unlawful. He replied, "Well, my dear, you and
others of your sex 72 want to travel in coaches, but I must remain an honorable man." The wife of Socrates (and perhaps also Job's wife) were similarly driven into the corner by
their virtuous husbands, but masculine virtue asserted itself in these men's characters without diminishing the credit due to the feminine character as posited in their relation.
Pragmatic Consequences73
The feminine sex has to develop and discipline itself in practical matters; the masculine sex does not understand this.
The young husband rules over his older spouse. This is based on jealousy according to which the party that is subordinate to the other in sexual capacity guards himself against
encroachment on his rights by the other party and thereby finds himself obliged to give in to being compliant and attentive toward the other party. Therefore every experienced
wife will advise against marriage to a
222
 223
young man, even if he is just of the same age, because with the passing of years the woman ages earlier than the man. Even if one disregards this dissimilarity, one cannot safely
count on the harmony, which is based on equality. A young, intelligent wife will have better luck in marriage with a healthy but, nevertheless, noticeably older man. However a
man [309] who perhaps has carelessly dissipated his sexual power before marriage, will be the fool in his own home because he can have domestic domination only so far as he
does not fail to fulfill any reasonable demands.
Hume remarked that women (even old maids) are most disturbed by satires on marriage than by sneers against their sex. 74 Sneers can never be meant seriously, but satires could
very well become serious if the difficulties of the state of being married are correctly emphasized with respect to what the unmarried person is spared. But eccentric thinking along
this line would only have bad consequences on the whole feminine sex, because it would degrade the woman to a mere means of satisfying the desires of the other sex; and this
might easily result in ennui and unsteadiness. The woman becomes free by marriage; whereas the man loses his freedom thereby.
To make a point of detecting the moral properties in a man, especially a young man, before the wedding, is never the proper business of a woman. She believes that she can
improve him; an intelligent woman, she says, can correct a man's bad habits; but in this judgment she frequently finds herself deceived in the most lamentable manner. This also
applies to the opinion of the naïve woman who believes that the debaucheries75 of her husband before marriage can be overlooked, because this instinct, if he has not yet indulged
enough, will now be sufficiently provided for by his wife. But those good children do not realize that sexual debauchery consists just in the variety of pleasure, and that monotony
in
223
 224
marriage will soon drive a man back to his former way of life.*
Who, then, should have the highest authority at home? Indeed, there can be only one who harmonizes all transactions under one concept which agrees with his own purposes. I
should say in the language of gallantry (though not without truth): the woman should reign and the man should rule; because inclination reigns and reason rules. The husband's
behavior must show that to him the welfare [310] of his wife is closest to his heart. But since the husband must know best how he stands and how far he can go, he becomes like a
cabinet minister who wishes, first of all, to express his dutiful compliance to a monarch who is only intent on pleasure, and who has begun a festivity or the construction of a
palace. The most high and mighty monarch can do everything he wants under the provision that the minister will lend him a helping hand in carrying out his wishes, even if at
present there is no money in the treasury and even if certain more urgent needs must first be attended to.
Since the woman is to be sought after (this is required for the refusal necessary to her sex), she will in marriage be generally seeking to please, so that, if perchance she should
become a widow while young, she will find suitors. The man gives up all such claims when he gets married. Therefore jealousy caused by a woman's desire to please is unjust.
Conjugal love, however, is intolerant by its nature. Women sometimes ridicule this intolerance; but, as already mentioned above, they do so in jest; because if a husband would be
tolerant and lenient toward the incursion of a stranger into his own rights, the result would be contempt aroused in his wife and also hatred toward such a husband.
The fact that fathers generally spoil their daughters,* The consequence of this is, as in Voltaire's Voyage de Scarmentado: "At last," he says, "I returned to my fatherland, Candia, took a wife there, soon became a cuckold, and
found that this is the most comfortable life of all."
224
 225
and mothers their sons, and that the wildest son, if he is only daring enough, is spoiled by the mother, seems to be caused by the prospect of each parent's needs at the time when
one of them has died. If the wife dies before the husband, the father receives caring support from his eldest daughter; but if the wife loses her husband, then the grown-up, kindlydisposed son has the duty, as well as the natural inclination, to honor her, to support her, and to make her life as a widow pleasant.
I have dwelt longer on the subject of characterization than may seem proportionate to the other divisions of anthropology. But Nature has also stored into her economy such a rich
treasure of arrangements for her particular purpose, which is nothing less than the maintenance of the species, that in the case of closer [311] researches there will be for a long
time enough material for admiring within the problems the wisdom of Nature's gradually unfolding designs and for putting this wisdom to practical use.
C. The Character of Nations 76
By the word people (populus) we mean the number of inhabitants living together in a certain district, so far as these inhabitants constitute a unit. Those inhabitants, or even a part
of them, which recognize themselves as being united into a civil whole through common descent, are called a nation (gens); the part which segregates itself from these laws (the
unruly group among these people) is called rabble (vulgus),* and their illegal union is called a mob (agere per turbas),77 a behavior which excludes them from the privileges of a
citizen.
Hume is of the opinion that, whenever each indi-
* The insult la canaille du peuple probably has its origin in canalicola, a loafer going to and fro along a canal in ancient Rome, and teasing the working people (cavillator et
ridicularius. Vid. Plautus, Curcul.).
225
 226
vidual in a nation is intent upon developing his own particular character (as is the case with the English), the nation itself has no character. 78 To me it seems that he is mistaken,
because the individual character's affectation is exactly the general character of the people to which the individual himself belongs, and it is also expressing contempt for all
foreigners, especially since the English nation believes that it alone can boast of a constitution which combines genuine domestic civil freedom with protective power against
anything foreign. Such a character is one of haughty rudeness which contrasts with trust-inspiring civility; it is a spiteful behavior toward every other person, which arises from
imagined selfsufficiency because they believe that one has no need of anybody else and that, consequently, one can excuse oneself from extending civilities toward others.79
In this way England and France, the two most civilized nations on earth,* who are in contrast to each other because of their different characters, are, perhaps chiefly for that
reason, [312] in constant feud with one another. Also, England and France, because of their inborn characters, of which the acquired and artificial character is only the result, are
probably the only nations who can be assumed to have a particular and, as long as both national characters are not blended by the force of war, unalterable characteristics.80 That
French has become the universal language of conversation, especially in the feminine world, and that English is the most widely used language of commerce** among tradesmen,
probably reflects the difference in their continental and insular geographic situation. But as to their present-day charac-
* It is understood that the German nation is omitted from this character analysis, because otherwise the praise by this author, who is German, would be self-praise.
** The mercantile spirit shows certain modifications of its pride in the difference of tone used in bragging. The Englishman says, "The man is worth a million"; the Hollander,
"He commands a million"; the Frenchman, "He owns a million.
226
 227
teristics and their formation by means of language, we should derive our findings from the indigenous character of the ancestral people in their lineage; but the documents for such
a study are not available. However, in an anthropology from a pragmatic point of view, we are only interested in presenting the characters of both, as they are now, in several
examples, and, as far as possible, systematically. These examples would permit judgment about what each has to know about the other, and how each could use the other to its
own advantage.
Hereditary maxims, or those which have become second nature through long usage, as well as those maxims grafted upon them, which express the disposition of a people, are only
so many risky attempts to classify the varieties in the natural tendencies of entire peoples more empirically for the geographer than rationally for the philosopher. 81*[313] To claim that the character of a nation is determined by its form of government is an unfounded assertion that clarifies nothing. Because from where does government itself
derive its own peculiar character? Climate and soil also cannot furnish the key, since migrations of entire peoples have shown that they do not change their character because of
the new location. Instead they have only adapted their character to the new
* If the Turks, who call Christian Europe Frankestan, would travel in order to learn about people and their national character (this is done by no other people but Europeans,
which proves the provinciality in spirit of all others), they would perhaps classify the European peoples according to the defects shown in their characters as follows: 1) The
land of fashion (France). 2) The land of moods (England). 3) The land of ancestry (Spain). 4) The land of splendor (Italy). 5) The land of titles (Germany, together with
Denmark and Sweden taken as Germanic peoples). 6) The land of lords (Poland), where every citizen wants to be a lord; but none of these lords, except one who is not a
citizen, wishes to be a subject. Russia and European Turkey, both largely of Asiatic lineage, would lie outside Frankestan; the first is of Slavic, the other of Arabian origin,
both are descended from two ancestral races which once extended their reign over a larger part of Europe than any other people; and they have hit upon a constitutional
system without freedom, where, therefore, no one is a citizen.
227
 228
circumstances, while language, type of business, and even type of dress always reveal the traces of their origin, and consequently also their character. I shall sketch their portrait
somewhat more from the side of their flaws and deviations from the rule than from the more flattering side (but, nevertheless, not in caricature), because criticism leads to
improvement, while flattery perpetuates corruption. In this way the critic offends less against the self-love of people, when he merely confronts them, without exception, with their
flaws, rather than stirring up the envy of those judged by praising some more and others less.
1. The French nation stands out among all others by its taste for conversation, in which it is the model for all the rest. It is a courteous nation, especially toward foreigners who
visit there, even if it is now out of style to be courtly. The Frenchman communicates his thoughts not because of interest but rather because of an immediate feeling of good taste.
Since this taste applies primarily to the world of women of high society, the language of ladies has become the language shared by all high society. It cannot be disputed at all that
an inclination of such a nature must also have influence on the ready willingness in rendering services, helpful benevolence, and the gradual development of human kindness
according to principles. An inclination of such a nature must make a people amiable as a whole.
The reverse of the coin is not sufficiently kept in check by considered principles; and, seen in the cold light of reason, it is imprudence not to let certain forms endure for long,
which have proven quite satisfactory, just because they are old or have been praised excessively. There is also a contagious spirit of freedom which, probably, also affects reason
itself, and, as to the relation of the people to the state, creates [314] an enthusiasm which sends its shock waves into everything and beyond all bounds. The peculiarities of this
people, sketched in
228
 229
black and white but according to life, easily permit without further description the emergence of a whole by merely naming disconnected fragments as materials for
characterization.
The words esprit (instead of bon sens), frivolité, galanterie, petit maître, coquette, étourderie, point d'honneur, bon ton, bureau d'esprit, bon mot, lettre de cachet, and so forth,
cannot be translated easily into other languages because they reflect more the peculiar disposition of the nation which uses them than the object which the thinking person is
talking about.
2. The English people. The old stock of Britons 82* (a Celtic people) seems to have been a race of sound people; but the immigrations of tribes of Germans and French (the brief
presence of the Romans left no noticeable trace) have destroyed the original characteristics of this people as their mixed language proves. Because of the insular situation of their
land, which protects them well against foreign invasions, and rather invites them to become aggressors, they have turned into a mighty nation of maritime commerce. So the
English people has a character which is has acquired for itself since it actually has none by nature. Consequently, the character of the Englishman cannot signify anything other
than the principle learned from early teaching and example, that he must make a character for himself, that is, see to it that he acquires one.83 An inflexible disposition to insist on
a voluntarily adopted principle, and not to deviate from a certain rule (no matter which), gives a person the assurance of knowing for certain what one can expect from him and
what he can expect from others.
It is evident that this character is more directly contrasted to that of the French people than to any other, because it renounces all kindness to others and even to
* As Professor Büsch correctly spells it (from the word britanni not brittanni). [Johann Georg Büsch (17281800), professor of mathematics at the Hamburg
HandelsakademieTrans.]
229 230
people of their own; while kindness has been the most prominent social quality of the French. The English merely claim respect for themselves, so that, by the way, everybody can
live according to his own will. For his own countrymen the Englishman establishes great [315] benevolent institutions unheard of among all other peoples. But the foreigner who
has been driven to England's shores by fate, and has fallen into dire need, will be left to die on the dunghill because he is not an Englishman, that is, not a human being.
But even in his own country the Englishman isolates himself when he pays for his own dinner. He prefers rather to dine alone for the same money in a separate room than at an
inn's table together with others, because some politeness is required at an inn. 84 And abroad, for example, in France, whither Englishmen (like Dr. Sharp)85 travel only to decry
all roads and inns as abominable, they gather in inns only for the sake of companionship among themselves. Since the French generally love the English nation, and praise it
respectfully, it is strange that the Englishman (who has never traveled outside his own country) usually hates and despises the French. This is probably not caused by rivalry
among neighbors (for in this respect England considers herself indisputably superior), but by the mercantile spirit in general, which makes English merchants very unsociable
when they attempt to portray the most prominent social class.* Since both nations are close to each other with respect to their coasts and are separated only by a channel (which
could very well be called a sea), their rivalry creates a political character modified by various manifestations of conflict. Concern86 on one side, and hatred on
* The mercantile spirit is generally unsociable in itself, just like the aristocratic spirit. One house (as the merchant calls his establishment) is separated from the other by its
business affairs as a castle is separated by a drawbridge from the other. Friendly relations without ceremony are proscribed, except with those establishments protected by the
house, which then, however, would not be regarded as subsidiaries of it.
230
 231
the other are two forms of incompatibility; one aims at self-preservation, 87 the other at domination; in the case of warfare the aim is extinction.
We can now more briefly draw the character sketch of the others, whose national pecularity cannot only be deduced, as in the preceding two cases, mostly from their different
types of culture, but also from their natural disposition resulting from mixture of originally distinct racial stock.
[316] 3. The Spaniard, who evolved from the mixture of European blood with Arabian (Moorish) blood, displays in his public and private behavior a certain solemnity; and even
the peasant expresses a consciousness of his own dignity toward his master, to whom he is lawfully obedient. The Spanish grandeur and even the grandiloquence evident in
colloquial conversation point to a noble national pride. For this reason the intimate roguishness of the French is entirely repulsive to the Spaniard. He is moderate and
wholeheartedly obedient to the laws, especially those of his ancient religion. This seriousness does not hinder him from gratifying himself on days of amusement (for example,
bringing in the harvest with song and dance); and whenever the fandango is played on a summer evening, there is no lack of laborers at leisure at this time who dance to this
music in the streets. This is the Spaniard's good side.
The Spaniard's bad side is that he does not learn from foreigners; that he does not travel in order to get acquainted with other nations;* that he is centuries behind in the sciences.
He resists any reform; he is proud of not having to work; he is of a romantic quality of spirit, as the bullfight shows; he is cruel, as the former auto-da-fé
* The provincial spirit of all nations, which is not moved by disinterested curiosity to learn about the outside world with one's own eyes, and still less willing to be
transplanted thither (as a world citizen), is something characteristic of such nations. In this respect the French, English, and Germans favorably differ from other nations.
231
 232
shows; and he displays in his taste an origin that is partly non-European.
4. The Italian unites French vivacity (gaiety) with Spanish seriousness (constancy); and his aesthetic character is a taste that is linked with emotion. The view from his Alps down
into the charming valleys offers stimulation to his courage on one side, and quiet enjoyment on the other. Temperament is not involved in this process in a mixed or aimless way
(for thus it would yield no character), but it is a tendency of the senses toward attuning to the feeling of the sublime as far as it is also compatible with the feeling of the beautiful.
His countenance reflects his strong play of sensations, and his face is full of expression. The pleading of an Italian advocate before the bar is so emotional that it resembles a
declamation on the stage.
Just as the Frenchman excels in his taste for conversation, so the Italian excels in his taste for art. The Frenchman prefers private amusement; [317] the Italian prefers public
entertainment like pompous pageantries, processions, great spectacles, carnivals, masquerades, splendor of public buildings, painting with a brush or wrought in mosaic, Roman
antiquities on a grand scale, in order to observe and to be seen in high society. Along with these (so that we do not forget the Italian's self-interest) he invented letters of credit,
banks, and the lottery. That is his good side; and this also extends to the independence, which gondolieri and lazzaroni 88 venture to display toward those of higher social rank.
A worse side is that the Italians converse, as Rousseau says,89 in halls of splendor, and sleep in rats' nests. Their conversazioni resemble the stock exchange, where the lady of the
house offers something to eat to a large number of people, so that they can share with each other the latest news as they wander around without the necessity of friendship. Latershe will dine with a select few chosen from the multitude. But the evil side is knife232
 233
drawing, or brigandage, assassins taking refuge in sacred sanctuaries, neglect of duty by the police, and so forth, all of which should not be blamed on the Roman citizens but
rather on their two-headed type of government. 90 However, these are accusations whose truth I cannot prove. They are of the kind with which the English commonly concern
themselves because they will not approve of any other constitution but their own.
5. The Germans are renowned for their good character; they have the reputation of honesty and domesticity; both are qualities which are not suited to splendor. Of all civilized
people, the German subjects himself most easily and permanently to the government under which he lives; and he very much dislikes the rage for innovation and the opposition to
the established order. His character is phlegm combined with understanding, he does not question the established order, nor does he try to invent a new one himself. And still he is
a person of all lands and climates; he emigrates easily, and is not passionately fettered to his fatherland. But if he arrives in foreign lands as a colonist, he will soon form with his
compatriots a sort of social club which, as a result of unity of language, and, partially, of religion, makes him part of a little clan, which under the higher authority of the
government distinguishes itself in a peaceful and moral way through industry, cleanliness, and thrift from the settlements of other nationalities. [318] This is how even the English
praise the Germans in North America.
Phlegm (taken in its good sense) is the temperament of cold deliberation and perseverance for the purpose of accomplishing one's end, as well as the tolerance of hardship
resultant from pursuing that end. Thus one can expect as much from the talent of the German's correct understanding and his deeply reflecting reason as from every other great
nation which is capable of the highest culture. The only exception lies in the domain of wit and artistic taste, where, perhaps, he may not be equal to the
233
 234
French, English, and Italians. This has been his good side, where things can be accomplished through unflagging industry, and for which genius* is certainly not required. Genius,
anyway, is by far not as useful as the German's industriousness which is linked with a sound talent for understanding. In his contact with others the German is characterized by
modesty. More than any other people, the Germans learn foreign languages; they are (as Robertson says) wholesale dealers in erudition, 91 and in the field of sciences they are the
first on the trail that is later followed by others with much ado; they have no national pride; and they are too cosmopolitan to be deeply attached to their native region. However, in
their own country, they are more hospitable to strangers than any other nation (as Boswell admits); they strictly discipline their children toward moral behavior, just as they rather
submit to despotism, because of their propensity to order and regulation, than venture upon innovations (especially when unauthorized reforms in government are concerned). That
is their good side.
The German's unflattering side is his propensity to imitation, and his low opinion of his own ability to be original (which is just the opposite of the stubborn Englishman). [319]
Most unfavorable of all is a certain mania for method, which does not make the individual strive for the principle of reaching equality with the rest of the citizens, but rather asks
for classification by de-
* Genius is the talent for discovering what cannot be taught nor learned. One can be taught by others how to make good verses, but not how to make a good poem, because
that must come spontaneously from the author's nature. Therefore one cannot expect that a poem be made to order, and be procurable as a product for a high price; instead, a
good poem must be conceived as an inspiration of which the poet himself cannot say how it was conceived, that is, a haphazard disposition whose very source is unknown to
him (scit genius natale comes, qui temperat [A: temperetEd.] astrum). Genius, therefore, glitters like a momentary phenomenon which appears and disappears at intervals, and
vanishes again. It is not a light that can be kindled at will and kept burning for a period of one's own choosing, but rather it is like a spark-scattering flash which a happy
seizure of the spirit entices from the productive imagination.
234
 235
grees of superiority, and by regulations regarding hierarchy. In this scheme of ranking, he is inexhaustible as to the invention of titles (Edlen and Hochedlen; Wohlgeboren and
Hochwohlgeboren; sometimes also Hochgeboren); 92 and thus he is servile out of mere pedantry. All this may very well have resulted from the nature of the German constitution,
but it must be noticed that the creation of this pedantic form itself has resulted from the nation's spirit and the natural propensity of the Germans. Accordingly, they have devised a
ladder reaching from the one who is to rule down to the one who is to be ruled; each rung is marked with the degree of prestige attributed to it. The person who has no profession,
and hence no title, is, as they say, ''a nobody." The state, which confers these titles, realizes some profit from this; but also, without paying attention to side effects, it arouses
demands of a different significance93 among its subjects, which must appear ridiculous to other nations. In fact, this mania for painstaking exactitude and this need for methodical
classification for the purpose of subsuming an entity under a single concept reveals the limitations of the German's innate talent.Since Russia has not yet developed definite characteristics from its natural potential; since Poland has no longer any characteristics; and since the nationals of European Turkey
never have had a character, nor will ever attain what is necessary for a definite national character, the description of these nations' characters may properly be passed over here.94
Anyway,95 since we are speaking here about innate, natural character which, so to speak, lies in the composition of the person's blood, and since we are not talking about the
artificially acquired (or affected) characteristics of nations,96 we must be very cautious in sketching them. In the character of the Greeks under the harsh oppression by the Turks,
and under the not much gentler pressure from the Caloyers,97 no change of temperament (vivacity
235
 236
and lightheartedness), nor any change in the structure of their bodies, their shapes, and facial features has occurred. These qualities [320] would actually persist if their form 98 of
religion and government would, under miraculous circumstances, grant them the freedom to regenerate themselves. Among another Christian people, the Armenians, a certain
commercial spirit of a special kind prevails. In order to trade they journey on foot from the borders of China to Cape Corso on the coast of Guinea. This points to a separate origin
of these wise and industrious people, who journey across almost the whole sketch of the ancient continent in a line from North East to South West, and who know how to be
received peacefully by all the peoples they encounter on the way. This proves that the Armenian's character is superior to the modern Greek's99 fickle and flattering character; but
the origin of the Armenian's character can no longer be uncovered. Thus we can judge with probability that the intermixture of races (caused by large-scale conquests), which
gradually extinguishes their characteristics, does not seem beneficial to the human raceall pretended philanthropy notwithstanding.
D. On the Character of Races100
As to this subject I can refer to what Girtanner101 has stated so beautifully and carefully in explanation and further development (of my principles); I shall only add something on
the classes of families, the varieties, or mutations which can be observed in one and the same race.
Instead of assimilation, which was intended by the melting together of various races, Nature has here made a law of just the opposite. In a nation of the same race (for example, of
the white race), instead of allowing the characters to develop constantly and progressively toward resembling one another, whereby ultimately only
236
 237
one and the same portrait would result as in prints taken from the same copperplate, Nature has preferred to diversify infinitely the characters of the same stock, and even of the
same family as to physical and spiritual characteristics. Nurses may flatter one of the parents by saying, "The child has inherited this from his father; and that from his mother";
but, if this were true, all variations of human procreation would have long been exhausted; [321] and, since the fertility of matings is regenerated by the heterogeneity of the
individuals, reproduction would have been brought to a standstill. Ash-colored (cendrée) hair, therefore, does not result from the mixture of a brunette with a blond, but rather
indicates a particular family stamp. Nature has sufficient supply at her disposal so that she does not have to send, for want of forms in reserve, a person into the world who has
already been there. 102 Also, we notice that close kinship notoriously leads to infertility.103
E. On the Character of the Species104
In order to sketch the character of a certain creature's species, it is necessary that the species be compared with and referred to in terms of other105 species already known to us.
What makes the species different from each other has to be quoted and referred to as the differentiating reason for its properties (proprietas). But if one kind of creature106 which
we know (A) is compared to another kind of creature which we do not know (non-A), how, then, can we expect or demand to sketch the character of A, when we have no middle
term for the comparison (tertium comparationis)? The highest concept of species may be that of a terrestrial rational being, but we will not be able to describe its characteristics
because we do not know of a nonterrestrial rational being which would en237
 238
able us to refer to its properties and consequently classify that terrestrial being as rational. It seems, therefore, that the problem of giving an account of the character of the human
species is quite 107 insoluble, because the problem could only be solved by comparing two species of rational beings on the basis of experience, but experience has not offered us
a comparison between two species of rational beings.108
Consequently, in assigning man his place within the system of animate nature, and thereby characterizing him, all that is safe for us to say is that he has a character which he
himself creates, because he is capable of perfecting himself according to purposes which he himself adopts. Consequently, man as an animal endowed with capability of reason
(animal rationabile) can make himself a rational animal (animal rationale). On these grounds he first preserves himself and his species; secondly, [322] he trains, instructs, andeducates his species for social living; thirdly, he governs the species as a109 systematic whole (arranged according to principles of reason) which belongs to society. But in
comparison with the idea of potential rational beings on earth, the characteristic of the human species is that Nature has planted in the species the seed of discord, and that Nature
has willed that the human species, through its reason, turn discord into concord or at least create a constant approximation of it. Concord contains its purpose in its idea, whereas
discord as action contains, within the plan of Nature, the means of a supreme and for us unfathomable wisdom. This wisdom is to affect the perfection of man through cultural
progress, even if this should mean some sacrifice of the pleasures of his life.
Among the living inhabitants of the earth, man is markedly different from all other creatures, because of his technical gift for manipulating things (mechanically-connected with
consciousness), his pragmatic gift (being clever in the use of others for his own purposes), and his moral gift of character (so that he can act toward himself
238
 239
and others according to the principle of freedom under the law). Any one of these three levels can by itself alone distinguish man characteristically from other inhabitants of this
earth.
1. The technical gift. Whether man was originally intended for walking on all fours (as Moscati 110 proposed, perhaps only as a thesis for his dissertation) or on two feet; whether
the gibbon, the orangutang, the chimpanzee, and other apes were so intended (which is a matter of contention between Linné and Camper);111 whether man is a herbivorous or
(since he has a membranous stomach) a carnivorous animal; whether he is by nature a predator or a peaceable animal because he has neither claws nor fangs, and consequently
(without reason) he would have no weapons, these are all questions whose answer requires no hesitation. Eventually the question could be raised whether man is by nature a
sociable animal or hermitlike and shying away from neighbors. The latter112 is apparently the more probable.
The assumption that an already fully developed first human couple was placed by Nature in the midst of food supplies, and not provided at the same time with a natural instinct
which we in our present natural condition do not have, is difficult to reconcile with Nature's provision for the maintenance of the species. The first man would drown [323] in the
first pool he saw, because swimming is an art which one has to learn; or the first man would eat poisonous roots and fruits, and thus be in constant danger. But, if Nature had
implanted this instinct into the first couple, how, then, was it possible that the instinct was not passed on to their children, something which never happens nowadays?
Songbirds, it is true, teach certain songs to their offspring and pass them on by tradition, so that a bird taken from his nest while still blind, and brought up by hand in isolation,
will have, after he has grown up, no song save a certain innate sound of his vocal organ. But
239
 240
where did the first song come from?* Since it was not learned, and if it had originated instinctively, why was it not inherited by the young?
The characterization of man as a rational animal is found in the form and organization of the human hand, its fingers, and fingertips. Nature has made them partly through their
construction, and partly through their sensitivity, not only for manipulating objects in one particular way, but also in an open-ended way. Nature has made them, therefore, fit to
be used by reason, and thereby Nature has indicated the technological gift, or the gift for skill, of this species as that of a rational animal.
2. The pragmatic gift is one level higher. It refers to becoming civilized through culture. It particularly has to do with the cultivation of social qualities and the natural tendency of
this species to advance in social matters from the crudity of mere self-reliance to a well-mannered (but not yet moral) being bent on concord. Man can be and must be educated
through instruction as well as correction (discipline). [324] The question arises (either with or against Rousseau) 113 whether the character of this species with respect to its
natural talent is happier with the crudity of man's nature than with the arts of culture where no end is in sight. Above all, it must be noted that all other animals left to themselves
reach as individuals their full destiny, but human beings reach their full destiny only as a species. Consequently, the human species can work itself up to its destiny only through
continuous
* We can accept Linné's hypothesis about the archeology of nature, which says that out of the universal ocean, which covered the entire earth, an island first emerged below
the equator, like a mountain, upon which gradually developed all climatic stages of warmth, from the heat on the lower shore of the island to the arctic cold on the summit,
together with all suitable plants and animals. Concerning the birds of all kinds, it is assumed that the songbirds imitated the native, audible sounds of many different birds. As
far as their own voices permitted, they united every sound with others, whereby each species formed its own distinct song which one bird later taught to the other (forming a
tradition). This is supported by the fact that finches and nightingales in various countries have slightly different songs.
240
 241
progress within an endless sequence of many generations. The goal of man's efforts will always remain within his view, and while the dedication to reach this final goal mayfrequently weaken, it can never be entirely reversed. 114
3. The moral gift. Here the question is whether man is good by nature or bad by nature, or whether by nature he is equally susceptible to one or the other, depending upon which
guiding hand he happens to fall into (cereus in vitium flecti etc.);115 in this last instance the species itself would have no character. But this last instance is contradictory in itself
because a being endowed with the faculty of practical reason and with consciousness of free-will (a person) sees himself in this consciousness, even in the midst of the darkest
imaginings, subject to a moral law and to the feeling (which is then called moral feeling) that he is treated justly or unjustly or that he is treating others justly or unjustly.116 This
is the intelligible character of humanity as such, and thus far man is good (by nature) according to his inborn gift. But experience also shows that in man there is an inclination to
desire actively what is unlawful, although he knows very well that it is unlawful. This is the inclination to evil which arises as unavoidably and as soon as man begins to make use
of his freedom. Consequently the inclination to evil can be regarded as innate. Hence, according to his sensible character, man must be judged as being evil (by nature). This is not
contradictory when we are talking about the character of the species because it can be assumed that the species' natural destiny consists in continual progress toward the better.117
The118 sum total of findings generated by pragmatic anthropology as to the classification of man and the characterization of his development is as follows: Man is destined by his
reason to live in a society of other people, and in this society he has to cultivate himself, civilize
241
 242
himself, and apply himself to a moral purpose by the arts and sciences. No matter how great [325] his animalistic inclination may be to abandon himself passively to the
enticements of ease and comfort, which he calls happiness, he is still destined to make himself worthy of humanity by actively struggling with the obstacles that cling to him
because of the crudity of his nature.
Man must, therefore, be educated to the good. But he who is to educate him is again a human who still finds himself in the crudity of nature. This human, now, is expected to
bring about what he himself is still in need of. This accounts for man's continuous deviation from his destiny and his ever-repeated return to it. We shall now refer to the
difficulties of solving this problem, and to the obstacles which have to be overcome.
A. As an animal species, the first physical criterion concerning this problem consists in man's impulse to maintain his species. But here the natural phases of his development do
not coincide with the civil phases. According to the natural phase, man in his natural state is, at least from his fifteenth year on, driven by sexual instinct, and he is also capable of
procreating and preserving his kind. According to the civil phase, he can (on the average) hardly venture upon this reproduction before his twentieth year. Even if the youth as a
citizen of the world has the ability early enough to satisfy his own desire and his wife's as well, he, nevertheless, has as a citizen of the state not yet the ability to provide for wife
and children. In order to start a household with his wife, he must learn a trade and become known as a craftsman. In the more refined classes his twenty-fifth year may very well
have passed before the youth has matured for his vocation. How does he fill this interval of compulsory and unnatural abstention? Scarcely with anything else but vices.
B. The motivation to acquire scientific knowledge, understood as a cultural achievement that ennobles human242
 243
ity, has in the entire human species no proportionate relation to the duration of life. When he has advanced in culture, to the stage of being able to make an original contribution,
the scholar is called away by death, and his place is taken by a freshman who shortly before the end of his life, after he too has just taken a step forward, again yields his place
[326] to another. What a mass of knowledge, what discoveries of new methods would now be on hand if an Archimedes, a Newton, or a Lavoisier 119 with their industry and
talent would have been favored by Nature with hundreds of years of continuous life without the loss of vital power! The advancement of the species in sciences, however, is
always only fragmentary (according to time) and affords no certainty against regression which always threatens because of interfering revolutionary barbarism.
C. The human species seems to fare no better in achieving its destiny with regard to happiness, which man's own nature constantly impels him to strive for, while reason limits the
condition of what is to be the value of happiness (that is, morality). One certainly need not accept the hypochondriac (ill-tempered) picture which Rousseau paints of the human
species. It is not his real opinion when he speaks of the human species as daring to leave its natural condition, and when he propagates a reversal and a return into the woods.
Rousseau only wanted to express our species' difficulty in walking the path of continuous progress toward our destiny. These problems do not exist in thin air. Experience
gathered in ancient and modern times must fill every thinking person with embarrassment and doubt as to whether our species will ever fare better.120
Rousseau wrote three works on the damage done to our species by 1) our departure from Nature into culture, which weakened our121 strength; 2) civilization, which resulted in
inequality and mutual oppression;
243
 244and 3) presumed moralization, which caused unnatural education and distorted thinking. I say, these three works, 122 which present the state of Nature as a state of innocence (the
gatekeeper of Paradise123 with a fiery sword prevents our return) should serve only as preludes to his Social Contract, his Émile, and his Savoyard Vicar so that we can find our
way out of the labyrinth of evil into which our species has wandered through its own fault. Rousseau did not really want that man go back to the state of nature, but that he should
rather look [327] back at it from the stage which he had then reached. He assumed that man is good by nature (as far as Nature allows the good to be passed on), but he is good in
a negative way. He is good by his own decision and by intentionally not wanting to be evil. He is only in danger of being infected and ruined by evil or inept leaders and
examples. Since, however, good men, who must themselves have been trained for it, are required for moral education, and since there is probably not one among them who has no
(innate or acquired) depravity himself, the problem of moral education for our species remains unsolved. It remains unsolved not only with regard to the degree, but even as to the
quality of the principle, because an innate, evil tendency in our species may be censured by common human reason, and at best also be controlled, but it will thereby still not have
been extinguished.
In124 the civil constitution of a state, which represents the highest degree of artifical enhancement of the good characteristics in the human species toward final purpose of its
destiny, animality still manifests itself earlier and basically stronger than pure humanity. Domesticated animals are only more useful to man than wild animals because they have
been weakened. Man's own will is always ready to turn hostile toward his neighbor. He never fails to press his claim to an unconditional freedom; he does not merely want to be
independent, but he even wants mastery over others who are equal to
244
 245
him by nature. This tendency can be observed in the smallest child* because in him, starting from culture toward morality, and not [328] (as reason dictates) from morality and its
laws, Nature strives to establish a culture which conforms with morality. This inevitably establishes the wrong tendency which does not answer the purpose. For example, one
would try in vain to deduct morality if religious instruction, which should necessarily be a moral cultivation, starts with the historical, which is only memory training.
Man only expects from Providence the education of the human species in its entirety, that is, collectively (universorum), and not individually (singulorum), where the multitude
does not represent a system, but merely an aggregate collected at random. He only expects from Providence that he be guided toward a civil constitution based on the principles of
freedom, but at the same time he expects that this constitution be based on a coercive principle of statuatory quality. He expects this from Providence, that is, he expects this from
a wisdom which
* The cry of a newborn infant does not sound like distress, but like indignation and articulated anger; not because something hurts, but because something bothers him.
Presumably he wants to move about, and his inability to do so feels to him like fetters that take away his freedom. What might have been Nature's intentions in letting a child
come into the world with loud cries, which are extremely dangerous for himself and for his mother in the crude state of Nature? The crying could attract a wolf or even a pig
which might eat him if the mother is absent or exhausted from the delivery of her offspring. But no animal except man (as he is now) will announce loudly his existence at the
time of birth, which seems to have been so arranged by the wisdom of Nature in order to maintain the species. It must, therefore, be assumed that in the first stage of Nature
(namely, in the period of crudity), the children of this class of animals did not cry at birth, and only later the crying began in the second stage when both parents had already
reached the level of culture necessary for domestic life. But we do not know how, or through what contributing causes, Nature determined on the course of such a
development. This observation involves more thinking and it suggests, for example, the question, whether this second stage is followed by a third, as in the case of major
revolutions of Nature when an orangutang or a chimpanzee developed the organs used for walking, touching of objects, and speaking, into human forms whose interior housed
an organ for the employment of the understanding and which developed gradually through social culture.
245
 246
is not his, but which is still (through his own fault) an impotent idea of his own reason. I say, such education, coming from above, is wholesome but harsh and severe because of
great hardship and cultivation of Nature, which lead close to the destruction of the entire species. This education consists in producing the good which man has not intended, but
which perpetuates itself once it has come into existence, because the evil is always internally at odds with itself. Providence refers exactly to that same wisdom which we observe
with amazement at work in the preservation of a species of organized natural beings that constantly busies itself with self-destruction, and still finds itself always protected.
Nevertheless, we do not assume a higher principle in such providential care than we assume to be at work already in the maintenance of plants and animals. By the way, the
human species should and can create its own good fortune. That he will [329] do so, however, cannot be determined a priori from what is known to us about man's natural
tendencies. It can be determined only from experience and history, with expectations as well-founded as necessary, that we should not despair about our species' progress toward
the better, but instead further (each to his best ability) with all good sense and moral inspiration the approach to this goal.
We can therefore say the first characteristic of the human species is man's ability, 125 as a rational being, to establish character for himself, as well as for the society into which
nature has placed him. This ability, however, presupposes an already favorable natural predisposition and an inclination to the good in man, because the evil is really without
character (since it is at odds with itself, and since it does not tolerate any lasting principle within itself).126
The character of a living being enables us to determine its destiny in advance. Regarding the purposes of Nature, we can assume the principle that she wants every creature toarrive at its own destiny through the proper
246
 247
development of all inherent tendencies, so that at least the species, if not every individual, accomplishes Nature's purpose. Among the irrational animals this actually happens,
reflecting Nature's wisdom. But regarding man only, the species reflects this principle. On earth we know of only one species of rational beings, the human species, in which we
also recognize only one natural tendency for this purpose, namely, to bring about sometime in the future the development of the good out of the evil through its own efforts. This
is a prospect which can be expected with moral certainty (sufficient certainty for the duty of working toward that purpose), unless it is suddenly cut off by upheavals in nature.
Then there are men, truly ill-natured men, who nevertheless are gifted, rational beings endowed with an inventive and a moral capacity as well. As their culture grows, they
become more and more aware of the wrongs which they themselves selfishly inflict upon each other. And since they see no other remedy for them than subordinating the private
interest (of the individual) to the public interest (encompassing all), they subject themselves, reluctantly though, to the discipline (of civil restraint) which they only obey,
however, by following the laws which they themselves have given. They feel themselves ennobled by the knowledge that they belong to a species which fits the [330] calling of
man as reason represents it to him in the ideal. 127
Basic Features Concerning the Description of the Human Species' Character128
1. Man was not meant to belong to a herd like the domesticated animals, but rather, like the bee, to belong to a hive community. It is necessary for him always to be a member of
some civil society.
The simplest and least artificial way to establish such a society is to have one queen bee129 in this hive (the monarchy). But many such hives next to each other will
247
 248
soon carry on feuds as robber bees do (war). But robber bees do not do this for the same reason as men, namely, to strengthen themselves by uniting with othersfor here the
comparison endsbut, rather, merely to use by cunning or force the industry of others for themselves. Each people seeks to strengthen itself by the subjugation of its neighbors,
either through the desire to expand or the fear of being swallowed up by the other unless one could not outdo him. Therefore civil or foreign war in this species, as great an evil as
it may be, is yet at the same time the mainspring for the transition from the crude state of nature to the civil state. War is like a mechanical device of Providence in which the
struggling forces weaken each other through friction, but, nevertheless, they are still maintained for a long time on a regular course by the push and pull of other mainsprings.
2. Freedom 130 and law (by which freedom is modified) are those two pivots around which civil legislation revolves. But, so that the law can be effective and not merely
recommended, a third term,* namely, authority, must be added. If authority is combined with freedom and law, the principles of freedom and law are ensured with success. There
are four conceivable combinations of authority with freedom and law. A. Law and freedom, without authority (anarchy). B. Law and authority, without freedom (despotism). [331]
C. Authority, without freedom and law (barbarism). D. Authority, with freedom and law (republic).
It is clear that only the last combination deserves to be called a true civil form of government. It should be noted, however, that we do not aim at establishing one of the three
forms of government (democracy) but, instead, we understand by republic only a state as such. The old
* This is analogous to the medius terminus in a syllogism, which, when linked with subject and predicate of the judgment, yields the four syllogistic figures.
248
 249
proverbial rule, salus civitatis (not civium) suprema lex esto, 131 does not mean that the psychological welfare of the common citizen (the happiness of the citizens) should serve
as the highest principle of the political constitution. Such well-being, which each individual envisions for himself according to his own personal inclination in this way or that, is
worthless for any objective principle such as universality requires. That proverb says only, the rational welfare, expressing itself in the maintenance of the political constitution that
was once established, is the highest law of civil society as such; after all, society lasts only because of that constitution.132
The character of the species, as is well known from the experience of all times and all nations, is as follows. The human race taken collectively (as the entire human species) is a
great number of people living successively and simultaneously. They cannot be without peaceful coexistence, and yet they cannot avoid continuous disagreement with one another.
Consequently, they feel destined by nature to develop, through mutual compulsion and laws written by them, into a cosmopolitan society (cosmopolitanismus) which is constantly
threatened by dissension but generally progressing toward a coalition. The cosmoplitan society is in itself an unreachable idea, but it is not a constitutive principle (which is
expectant of peace amidst the most vigorous actions and reactions of men). It is only a regulative principle demanding that we yield generously to the cosmopolitan society as the
destiny of the human race; and this not without reasonable grounds for supposition that there is a natural inclination in this direction.If we now ask whether the human species can be considered a good or a bad race (it can be called a race only when one thinks of it as a species of rational beings on earth,
compared to those rational beings on other planets, sprung as a multitude of creatures from one demiurge),133 then I must confess that there is not much to boast about.
Nevertheless, anyone who con249
 250
siders [332] human behavior not only in ancient history, but also in recent history will often be tempted to coincide with Timon's 134 misanthropic judgment, but far more often
and more to the point, he will coincide with Momus,135 and find foolishness rather than evil the most striking characteristic of our species. But, since foolishness combined with
traces of evil (when it is called madness) cannot be ignored in the moral physiognomy of our species, it is obvious from the concealment of a good part of our thoughts, which
every clever person deems essential, that everyone in our race finds it advisable to be on his guard,136 and not to reveal himself completely. This behavior betrays the tendency of
our species to be evil-minded toward one another.
It could well be that on another planet there might be rational beings who could not think in any other way but aloud. These beings would not be able to have thoughts without
voicing them at the same time, whether they be awake or asleep, whether in the company of others or alone. In what kind of different behavior toward others would this result, and
what kind of effect would it have in comparison with our human species?137 Unless they are all as pure as angels, we cannot conceive how they would be able to live at peace
with each other, how anyone could have any respect for anyone else, and how they could get along with each other. Hence, it is part of the original composition of a human
creature, and it belongs to the concept of the species, to explore the thoughts of others, but to conceal one's own. This nice quality, then, does not fail to deteriorate gradually from
pretense to intentional deception, and finally to lying. This, then, would result in a caricature of our species, and not only justify* good-natured ridicule of the species but
* Frederick II once asked the excellent Sulzer [Johann Georg Sulzer (172079), translator of HumeEd.], whom he valued for his merits, and whom he had made Superintendent
of Schools in Silesia, what he thought about the character of man. Sulzer replied, ''Since we have built on [Rousseau's] principle that man is good by Nature, things are going
better." "Ah"
(footnote continued on the next page)
250
 251
also contempt for what constitutes its character. This would also lead to the admission that this race of terrestrial rational beings deserves no honorable place among other rational
beings of the universe (unknown to us). On the other hand, such a condemning judgment reveals [333] a moral capacity of the species, an innate summons of reason, to work also
against that tendency. Thus we tend to present the human species not as evil, but as a species of rational beings, striving among obstacles to advance constantly from the evil to the
good. In this respect our intention in general is good, but achievement is difficult because we cannot expect to reach our goal by the free consent of individuals, but only through
progressive organization of the citizens of the earth within and toward the species as a system 138 which is united by cosmopolitical bonds.
(footnote continued from the previous page)
__________
[said the king], "mon cher Sulzer, vous ne connaissez pas assez cette maudite race à laquelle nous appartenous." It is also a characteristic of our species that, in striving for a
civil constitution, it requires discipline from religion, so that what cannot be attained through external compulsion can be effected by internal constraint (of conscience).
Legislators use the moral capacity of man for political purposes, this is a tendency that belongs to the character of the species. If, however, morality does not precede religion
in the disciplining process of the people, religion makes itself lord over morality, and statutory religion becomes an instrument of state administration (politics) under religious
despots. This is an evil which inevitably upsets and misguides the character it governs by deception (called political wisdom). While publicly professing that he was merely the
first servant of the state, Frederick II could not conceal the contrary in his agonizing private confession, but he excused his own role by attributing this depravity to the evil
race called the human species