Introduction to the doctrine of reason
according to the thoughts of Professor Kant
All our cognitions are acquired
1. through experience
2. through our own practice and
3. through instruction.
From learning arises the spirit of imitation." This learning happens in
childhood. There is of course a certain skill that one brings about for
oneself through imitation; but he who imitates shows the least degree of
capacity.
The first origin of our cognitions* is empirical. Many things arise
through imitation and many cognitions through imitation/
We see what others have shown us and we imitate.
The 2nd kind is the practice of our acquired skill. Through frequent
employment"* of our insights and talents we attain a greater cognition and
new insights, and these can be increased still further by means of our own
experience.
The last thing is to attain a cognition through universal rules[;] these
are derived from reason.
The first method of attaining cognitions must be abandoned just as
soon as the capacities achieve a faculty of cultivating' themselves. One
must seek to think for oneself, to judge for oneself.
This kind of practice with our capacities demands the very same degree, even if one thinks in opposition to what others have thought.
The natural understanding has its own laws, according to which alone it
can proceed. These are called natural laws.
Besides natural laws there are also precepts for the artificial7 understanding. The first is to proceed completely without laws, and to make use
"Nachahmung."
"Kenntniße."
"Imitation."
"Ausübungen."
"excoliren."
"gekünstelten."I M M A N U E L KANT
neither of natural [lawsp nor of precepts. If, next, one wants to cultivate
17 one's own reason, one first makes use of the natural laws of reason. This
happens when one thinks often, or through practice or frequent attempts,
when one considers an object according to both particular and universal
laws.
The 2nd use of the understanding takes place according to artificial''
rules, or according to precepts, and from this arises the artificial understanding.
One only learns to walk by first being led[;] so too does one learn to
think by first of all imitating[;] after that one begins to use his feet himself
and alone. Thus we begin to judge for ourselves and to use our understanding through frequent and repeated attempts to judge for ourselves.
The merely natural laws are cultivated by means of experience, but for
the artificial use I have to have other rules. One must first imitate[,] then
practice by oneself, and finally one acquires precepts.
Through imitation we can acquire crafts, but through precepts a science. Versification can be compared, as it were, with crafts.
We learn to judge finely' by rules, but to write poetry finely' through
frequent practice.
All cognition takes place according to rules: These are either merely
natural or artificial.
Natural rules concern the common and healthy understanding and
healthy reason.
The artificial rules are the rules of learnedness. We acquire their first
use not by imitation but by frequent use of our reasonf;] the common
understanding is thereby cultivated.
The common use of the understanding is that with objects of experience.
The artificial [use] is that according to precepts and rules.
People talk much now about the healthy understanding^] they prize it
too highly. Some have believed that healthy reason differs from the sciences merely in degree. But this gives no distinct boundary where one
stops and the other begins. Healthy reason and learnedness are distinct
not merely in degree but also in species[;] there are 2 particular sources of
18 each kind.
A learned man is one whose learnedness is not grounded on common
experience. According to the common mode of speech, understanding is
called a common understanding insofar as it is found in most in the same
degree.
It is a healthy understanding, however, when it is correct. It is not
healthy by degrees; rather, correctness is when the understanding and
* Ak, "Natürlichen Gesetze"; MS, "Natürlichen" (KI, Ixvi).
* "künstlichen."
' "Schön zu urtheilen."
; "schön zudichten."
reason judge according to laws that agree with experience. But when there
are no other prindpia besides experience^]* then a healthy reason still
remains a common reason. There is also an instructed understanding,
which could not have been acquired through common experience; and
this is a science. There is a logica of the common understanding and of ;
healthy reason and a logica of learnedness. It serves to enrich the common
and healthy understanding, and to cultivate this healthy reason for
learnedness.
The logica of healthy reason will have one's own experience as its
principium and thus be empirical; it will not contain the rules for how we
ought to think but rather will indicate the rules according to which we
commonly think. There are 2 sorts of rules[:] A.) the rules according to
which one proceeds[;] these are laws of appearance, and subjective^1
These subjective laws are the laws of reason, according to which it commonly proceeds in judging and thinking. B.) Objeaive laws, according to
which the understanding ought to proceed. These are called dogmata^.
Subjective laws bring about errors. One extends healthy reason by
attending to the rules according to which the understanding ought to
proceed.
We extend objective laws through doctrines, but to cultivate healthy
reason one need not give any universal rules or precepts; learned reason is
not grounded on empirical prindpia.
Common understanding is the understanding for judging according to
laws of experience; common reason, however, [is] reason by which we
infer according to the laws of experience. This reason is called common,
then, because it is the least degree, with all objects that come before us.
On the occasion of experience we always have a measuring stick by which
we compare sizes with one another. We proceed thus when we want to
find the average size; we take that, namely, of which we want to find the 19
average size, e.g., man[;] we reckon every man's size according to the
measuring stick, add these together, divide it by the number of men whom
we have ever"1 seen in our lives[;] from this the average size then emerges,
which is adequate for every man. Thus too is the average size of the
understanding elicited from the understanding with which one is acquainted through common experience. The common understanding is
the measure. The common and healthy understanding is a small but
correct understanding, and its cognition has great usefulness. In an area
of farmers there are not nearly as many errors as in a district of learned
men that is just as large. For the farmer always goes by the guiding thread
of experience^] he judges about little, but judges correctly about that
* Ak, "sind."; MS, "sind" (KI, Ixvi).
' Ak,"Suhjeaiv"; MS, "Subjectiv" (KI, Ixvi).
* Reading "jemahls" for "niemahls," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
little. The employment of common and healthy reason is also easy[;] all
cognition from experience has more life, more that is intuitive, than that
which has arisen from universal concepts. The first advantage of common
reason is simplicity. The 2nd is correctness. The 3rd usefulness. The 4th ease
and the 5th clarity and liveliness. For cognitions arise with the light with
which empirical representations are endowed. Accordingly, healthy reason will suffice for belles lettres."
Taste really requires no learnedness at all to be quite perfect. In fact,
learned taste is false, spoiled taste.
What is beautiful must please universally and please everyone. For
passing judgment on beauty, experience is required, and the judgment of
the beautiful and the ugly is made in consequence of common and healthy
reason. Common and healthy reason lies at the basis of all learnedness; it
becomes ridiculous if it is not grafted onto this stem. In history we do not
need common understanding^] so is it, too, with many mathematical
propositions. But in the philosophical and all other sciences, where mere
imitation of another understanding is not sufficient, but rather the spirit of
genius itself is necessary, the common understanding is indispensable.
The use of all the cognitions of the learned, and their application, is
20 possible only through healthy reason. Someone can be a learned man
without a healthy understanding, to be sure, but this is a ridiculous pedant.
All learnedness is either historical or rational. Cognition which is derived
from common reason as regards its form, but from common experience as
regards its matter, is historical.Historical learnedness includeshistory, geography, etc. A historically learned man can also make reflections, but these
belong then to rational learnedness. The matter in rational learnedness can
also be grasped by common reason and experience. But the form is wholly
different. Men find more amusement in the faculty of being able to give
themselves a pleasure than in the pleasure itself. When I draw" the particular from the universal I need understanding, but when I infer the universal
from particular cases, then I need another method. The understanding
cognizes'everything a priori, healthy reason a posteriori. We have cognitions that are empirical, since we ascend from below, and in rational ones
we descend from above. The logic that is an organon of rational learnedness does not concern historical but rational cognitions. The logic that is an
organon can prescribe rules to a learnedness that is already present, and
then it is called logica critica, or it can prescribe rules through which one
can achieve learnedness, and then it is called logica dogmatica[.} All
logics are not dogmatic but critical. Philosophy involves more genius than
imitation.
The whole of nature moves according to rules[;] thus water moves
* "schönen Wissenschaften."
' "abziehe."
according to hydraulic rules, nature operates according to rules, even
inconstant weather has its certain rules, although we may not notice them.
Animals move according to rules of which they often are not at all conscious. Man acts according to rules and in particular makes use of the
understanding according to certain propositions and rules. How often do
men act according to rules, too, without being conscious of them? E.g.,
they speak their mother tongue. Employment of our powers often occurs
without our being conscious of it, and this is (i.) because this already lies
in our nature. (2.) It often occurs by imitation, by means of an example
which we imitate, in order gradually to make use of our understanding as
we see that others make use of it. (3.) One's own use. Our own practice 21
brings us to the skill to use the understanding without being conscious of
its rules.
As man learns to walk, so does he also learn to think. This understanding thus educated^1 [is called] sens commun.q When it is correct it is called
the healthy understanding, because the skill of using it is subjected to a
common use. The frequent use of our understanding among the objects
of experience finally makes us fit to use it correctly. It can become correct,
then, through mere practice and use. The healthy understanding should
be common[;] hence the understanding that goes further than its senses
teach it in experience is not commonf;] that would be the learned use of
the understanding. The healthy understanding is concerned with experience, then; it must proceed according to rules of which it is itself not
conscious/ Thus it is not undisciplined[;] it is only that it does not know
these rules in abstracto but rather in concreto. Some occupations involve
a healthy, alert understanding, then.
The causes of things do not strike the senses as much as their effects do.
Hence one must also be acquainted with the rules according to which one
can use the healthy understanding. In many cases one cannot rely on his
own practice; but the only instructor of the common understanding is
experience. First of all, then, the healthy understandingand healthy reason
are greatly needed, then, to provide a basis for all abstract higher cognitions[;] we commonly oppose healthy reason to the affected learnedness of
proud erudition. But this will not do, for learnedness always presupposes
the healthy understanding, [as] art does nature. They are distinctae, to be
sure, but not oppositae. It has become the fashion, however, to praise the
healthy understanding to the detriment of the honor of the sciences. It is of
course no criticism if one says that someone lacks science, but if someone
does not have a healthy understanding he is a natural minor, a child. At the
least, then, we demand of everyone healthy understanding.
"gebildete."
Ak, "Sens commun; MS, "Sens commun" (KI, Ixvi).
Reading "nicht selbst bewußt" for "selbst bewußt," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
There are certain average types of perfectionsf;] e.g., the beauty of a
woman is, as it were, a merit, ugliness offends, but tolerable looks are an
average thing, which one expects of people, as it were. People are distinguished by beauty and ugliness in particular. So is it too with people's size.
22 Our eyes form a certain idea of the average, and what is extraordinary,
people in most cases agree on this. Thus one speaks, e.g., of a man's
wealth. The average between riches and povertywe call being well-off \\ In
all our concepts, then, we make the average a measuring stick. So too is
the healthy understanding the average among people's capacities. Healthy
reason is not supposed to go a step further than experience leads it. The
healthy understanding does not cognize or judge in abstracto but in
concreto[;] it draws its judgments from experience. However it can also
cognize universally[,] a priori[,] and in abstracto much that experience
teaches us. The healthy understanding is thus the faculty of judging
correctly in concreto. Often quite reasonable people cannot judge at all in
abstracto, since just as often they think in concreto. So it is in moral cases,
e.g., by means of an example in a case one cognizes things in concreto. The
understanding that can judge in abstracto is called the more refined, scientific understanding. The natural faculty of judging is the understanding,
the faculty of inferring is reason. Through experience one becomes clever
but not learned. Cleverness does not consist in science[;] one can be and
become clever without any learnedness. The healthy understanding and
reason show their value especially in praxis^. No science can in the least
replace5 or compensate for a certain lack of the healthy understanding and
its application in concreto, although it can well replace much else. Our
universal judgments alone cannot help us. With all rules I have to know
(i.)' whether they may be applied to the case.
(2.) As to how I am to apply them here, there can be very learned people
lacking all healthy understanding. In the use of the understanding there is
thus something that nature has reserved for genius, as it were, and which
no art can replace.
Through an excess of learnedness people often become all the more
absurd and completely unfit for judging in concreto. The healthy understanding, which is small but correct, involves (i.) simplicity. It remains on
the ground" of experience and does not love chimerical ideals. This very
simplicity makes the understanding all the more correct, certain, and
reliable than science. An academy of sciences in Paris concocts 1000
23 times more errors than a village full of farmers. (2.) Its cognitions are
intuitive through examples and instances. It represents for us the objecta in
natura, while the more refined understanding only shows the shadows of
Reading "im geringsten ersezen" for "im geringsten nicht ersezen."
Reading "wißen, i: ob" for "wißen, ob," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"an dem boden."
10 •
things. The healthy understanding is the controleuf of learnedness. The
common healthy understanding grows without instruction. Thus are common, living languages distinguished from learned, dead languages.
To state universal rules by which one may pass judgment on the infallibility of a witness involves more than simply common and healthy understanding^] it involves art and learnedness. Languages were there before
their grammars, speakers before rhetoric, poets before poesy.
If I have universal cognitions"" of the understanding, and universal rules
for it, too, then I still must have in addition understanding, in order to
judge whether this or that actually stands under this rule or not. All
doctrine in the whole world is just a universal complex* of rules for using
the powers of the understanding, but there still has to be-"1 an understanding, which only nature can give. Persons who possess learnedness but lack
a healthy understanding are far more absurd than the wholly ignorant.
From this arises pedantry, however. An obstinate dummy cannot be called
a pedant. Learnedness must always be there, but the ability to apply
cognized universal rules to particular cases in concreto must be lacking.
Although a pedant, with all his science, still possesses a kind of dumbness,
of course. So is it with all making of witty observations in societyf,] even
with compliment-making in accordance with universalprecepts. The Chinese have books of compliments[.] Universal rules always bear witness to
the weakness of our understanding. Like a beginner's lexicon of a languagef.] There is much regularity without consciousness of the rules; so is
it with the healthy understanding. But the use of the understanding in
accordance with rules of which one is conscious is called science. There are
cases where someone without science can go further than someone else
with science, but also where the greatest healthy understanding cannot go
as far as science alone. Thus in mathematics, surveying, one cannot get
along by means of the mere understanding^] there must always be some
science there. So is it with the apothecary's art, too. To pass judgment on
morality, on right and wrong,2 on the other hand, no science or learnedness is needed. Otherwise the human race would be very imperfect. Here 24
the common understanding is the judge of science.
In all sciences a precept serves to develop our capacities for all cases.
But with all instruction in art it is always necessarily left to the subject's
understanding whether, and to what degree, these universal precepts are
applied in individual cases. Thus one cannot possibly become clever in
accordance with universally valid rules and precepts, since cleverness
French: supervisor, controller.
"Kenntniße."
"ein allgemeiner Inbegriff."
Ak, "so muß"; MS, "es muß" (KI, Ixvi).
"des Rechts und Unrechts."
11
really consists in being able to subsume individual cases in common life
under the universal rules of such life.
The discipline that contains the rules of the good use of the understanding and of reason in general is called logica. It does not determine any
individual cases[.] In all other sciences, logic is applied. Logic is related to
the whole use of the understanding just as grammatica is to a language.
Grammar always has a source for the correctness of its rules, but the
proof lies in experience.
Logic shows the rules for the use of the understanding and reason,
which can themselves be cognized a priori and without experience, since
they do not depend on it. The understanding here has insight into its own
rules and makes thereof a discipline, an instruction, which can be known a
priori, however, and therefore it is called a doctrine.
In logic not only is reason applied, actually, but reason is its object, the
object of its consideration in usu.
There are many cognitions whose form is not rational, and in that case
it is not a doctrine of reason. So is it, e.g., with the science of taste.
Philosophia is in general the science of reason" of the qualities of things.
On the first point it differs from the historical, on the second from the
mathematical sciences. It is called a science of reason, however, because it
expounds cognitions in abstracto.
For establishing a first science, such as, e.g., logic is, nothing is required but the common healthy understanding.
The special and fully appropriate name for logic is science of reason,*
25 because this is its object. The many other sdentias rationales should be
called reason's sciences/
Logic is called a science because its rules can be proved by themselvesf,] apart from all use[,] a priori. On this account neither grammar
nor aesthetics is a science. And there really and properly is no science of
the beautiful at all; rather, whatever we know of the beautiful is nothing
but a critica.
Logica will thus have no other grounds or sources than the nature of
human understanding. For any cognition at all, and thus for logic, there
are always (i.). .. a) objective and b) subjective grounds. In every science
one rightly studies the object, what belongs to its greatest perfection, but
also . . . (2.) the subject, i.e., the means[,] the substmtaL[,] for attaining the
object. And so in sciences of the understanding I have to study man first
and foremost[;] but since this happens seldom or among few, there arise
thence, e.g., the many errors in morals in particular, which most moralists
" "Vernunft-Wißenschaft."
* "Vernunft-Wißenschaft."
' "Wißenschaften derVernunft."
12
commit/ who can speak admirably of virtue, to be sure, and can praise,
recommend, and describe it, but who are not in a position to develop the
appetite and love for employing it[,] to produce it in their audience,
because they have not studied man.
Logica is a good philosophia concerning the good use of reason, and of its
rules. Thus it considers not just the nature of human reason alone but
also in particular its precepts as well.
Psychologies develops the nature of the human understanding based on
experience and considers it. It too will have its sources, then, i.e., we will
have to learn some subjective laws of the use of reason from psychology
and experience.
Thus we can take as the object of our consideration ist the subjective
laws of our understanding, in accordance with which we actually make use
of our understanding,
That science which examines the subjective laws of the rules of our
uses of understanding and reason is called psychologia.
Logic does not really contain the rules in accordance with which man
actually thinks but the rules for how man ought to think. For man often
uses his understanding and thinks otherwise than he ought to think and
use his understanding. 26
Logic thus contains the objective laws of the understanding and of
reason. Thus the portrayal of a good republic is often so opposite to an
actually existing republic that it contains precisely the opposite of the
latter.
Thus we have basically only 2 objective doctrines, for there are only 2
objective powers of the soul[:] Power of cognition and faculty of desire. Thus
logic as well as morals has as its object apraxisL, an employment, the use of
our understanding, the application of our free faculty of choice. But they
are not for this reason called practical sciences.
We can have a theoretical [and]' also a practical logic and morals.
Disciplines are practical when their effects are practical.
Logic is not merely a critique, it is an actual doctrine, which can be
proved. Its rules are taken in abstracto and proved. Not every doctrine is
practical, however[;] it can be a pure theory. Now if logic is a mere theory
of the conditions under which a cognition is perfect according to laws of
the understanding and of reason, then it is not^ a means of execution-^ it
would be a theory but not an organon.
There is a logic that is called a scientia propaedeutica, an introductory
science.
Reading "die meisten Moralisten begehen" for "die meisten Moralisten."
Ak, "und auch"; MS, "auch" (KI, Ixvii).
Reading "kein Mittel" instead of "ein Mittel," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
"Execution."
13
And thus it will serve us as a means of critique or as an organon[;] but it
is not an organon,* it only sharpens the understanding in judging concerning cognitions[.]
Logic contains the rules of the use of our understanding and of our
reason, then. Thus everything else stands under it. It opens the way to all
other sciences.
* Reading"Mittel der Critic oder als ein Organon, das ist sie aber nicht" for "Mittel der
Critic, aber nicht als ein Organon, sie," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
14Introduction
to the doctrine of reason
according to theAuthor
There are many rules of movement, and of the understanding^] every
ship, every fish, follows the rules of movement. We ourselves are subject
to these laws. We observe them in walking and in other movements.
Nature has implanted these laws in men and animals. But in the case of 27
these laws we do nothing more than fulfill them unknowingly, like the
animals.
It would be needless to seek to scout out these laws and not to take a
single step without reflection. As the fish in its swimming observes these
rules most exactly by means of practice, so can we too, just by means of
practice only, acquire a skill in observation of them[.] How quickly do we
know how to help ourselves when we are about to fall? But we would lack
this capacity if we sought first to reflect on what position we should take.
Borellus1 has written a book on rule-governed movement.
Besides the laws and rules of movement, however, there are also rules
and laws of the understanding. We arrange all our judgments in accordance with these laws. As a child in walking learns to observe the laws of
movement, so too, in judging, does it seek to form itself according to those
laws of the understanding. All this it does unknowingly,and it acquires the
skill merely through practice.
For common cognition it is not necessary that we be conscious of these
rules and reflect on them. If we were to do that we would lose very much.
But if our understanding wants to have ascended to learned cognition,
then it must be conscious of its rules and use them in accordance with
reflection, because here common practice is not enough for it. These
rules, which the understanding has to observe in learned observation or
cognition, are prescribed to us by logic, which we are now about to
expound.
The author defines it quite correctly: it is a science that treats of the
rules of learned cognition and of learned exposition. A shorter definition
15
would be: Logic is a science that teaches us the use of the understanding
in learned cognition.
It is also called philosophia Instrumentalis, because it can be seen, as it
were, as an instrumentum of all further philosophical sciences.
Through frequent observations we have scouted out the rules of the
understanding. Aristotle established some; but these were nothing but
road signs toward errors. It took great effort to forget such false propositions, to give the understanding its natural perfection again, and to investigate its true rules.
28 § 2
A correct logic is like a straight line, so that one must not deviate from it
either to the right or to the left. It would be desirable that logic be brought
to such correctness and perfection.
The author indicates to us in this paragraphs whence we must derive
its rules, if we want to make it that perfect.
Contributing to this are, namely,
1. experiences of the effects of human reason[.] Bacon ofVerulam2 (see
his life in Formey's Hist, of Philosophy,* p. 293 ff. and in Gentzkenius's
Historia Philosophical p. 156, 157) first showed the world that all
philosophy consists of phantoms of the brain if it does not rest on experience.
It would be just as necessary to write an experimental logic as physics,
in which one should investigate how man can err through prejudices, and
overhastiness, and in other ways too, so that rules can be prescribed for
him as to how he ought to guard against that.
One should make observations, furthermore, as to how we can judge
most correctly, and also prescribe rules on this in logic.
2. We have to look at the nature of the human understanding, so diat
one can set up rules appropriate to it.
It would be foolish to set up logic for rational beings in general, or even
for angels, and to think, in doing so, that it could be useful to us too. It
would be just as if I were to give to a cripple, who has to walk with
crutches, rules and precepts for how he should walk and run like someone
healdiy. 3. Our rules have to be governed by those universal basic trudis of
human cognition that are dealt widi by ontologia. These basic truths are
\heprincipia of all sciences, consequently of logic too. We must remember
also diat here at the beginning of philosophia we are not yet in a position to
provide a perfect logica[;] that requires insights that one can only use widi
an audience already familiar with the whole of philosophy. Here we will be
concerned to give only provisional rules for learned cognition, which will
make it easier to learn the remaining sciences.
16
§3 29
The purpose of the doctrine of reason can be divided into the immediate
and the mediate purpose. The immediate one is the improvement of
learned cognition, the mediate one that of common cognition. This last can
happen if, in daily intercourse, one seeks to improve men's concepts, in
doing which one must not make use of scholarly termini if one does not
want to be called a pedant.
As far as the immediate purpose of logic is concerned, namely, the
improvement of learned cognition, this concerns those who are learned by
profession, as well as others. Through it everyone can improve his learned
cognition as much as he will. Those who are learned by profession differ
from others by means of certain termini technid, and also through the fact
that learnedness is the noblest employment, although it is often pursued
by others, e.g., by kings, only as an avocation.1
Since the number of the sciences is now so great, it would be fair for
each to have his special field assigned to him, because it is impossible to
perfect oneself in all sciences.
Among those persons who are not learned by profession one could
reckon women, who, in accordance with their capacities, can also occupy
themselves with learnedness.
There are sciences which require a sharp mind, much reflection, and
profundity. These are for the male sex. On the other hand there are
sciences that require wit and a kind of feeling, and these are proper for
women.
§5
Here philosophy is discussed. Its object is the universal qualities and
characters of things. It is well to notice, however, that philosophy does not
look to see quotiem aliquid positum sit,-' but rather only quodpositum sit.k It
considers only qualities, it only asks, what is posited?Mathese, on the other
hand, investigates how many times the thing is posited, and investigates
the quantitates of things, how great they are. Philosophy, furthermore,
does not consider all qualities, not the whole character of things, but only 30
those that are met with in many things and on account of this are called
universal.
Philosophy is a science, but one must not think on that account that
things must always be demonstrated and defined in philosophy. Mathematics has that feature.
' Reading"Nebenwerk" for "Nebenwerkzeug," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
1 how often something is to be posited.
* what is to be posited.
17
Our author's definition, which he gives for philosophy, is the following:
philosophy, he says, is a science of the universal characters of things,
insofar as they are known without belief. It is also customary to say:
philosophia est scientia, quae circa rerum rationes1 versatur[;]m but because
philosophy occupies itself not only with the grounds of things but also
frequently simply with their characters, one easily sees that this definition
is incorrect. Philosophy involves a higher use of reason[;] but it is hard to
determine where philosophy begins and where it ends, just as it is hard to
determine" the boundary, e.g., between poverty and wealth. A person is
rich, it is said, e.g., if he has 50,000 or 20,000 Rthlr./ but with what
amount of money does he cease to be rich, and when does he become
rich? —The boundaries between stinginess and thriftiness are just as hard
to determine. At some point philosophy must be distinct from the common use of reason, poverty from wealth, miserliness from thrift, but where
this point is it is hard to say.
Now we will consider the author's restrictions[;] he says: the characters
of things must be cognized in philosophy without belief.
Our cognition is of three kinds. We cognize something
1. through experience, which happens with occurrences and in general with many
objects of history.
2. through reason, which abstracts universal cognitions^ from individual things,
and
3. through belief in the testimony of another. In this latter way we know that
Paris, London, etc., are in the world, although we have not seen any of them.
We do not doubt this at all, either, because we rely on the testimony of others
who have been there. In philosophy there is no belief[;] here no one must rely
on the testimony of others[;] even if someone were to swear to the immortality
of the soul, we would not believehim or trust him without proofs, becausein
31 philosophy there is no belief. How does someone who is a blind follower of
someone else deserve the title of a philosophus? Pythagoras's pupils accepted
everything their teacher said to them only for five years, and these supposed
philosophers do this their whole life long, and always say cojtog e4>ct.*
If there were nothing at all but belief in philosophy, it would not be
possible that now this man, now that one, should be placed on the throne
of the sciences, and that such changes of fashion in the learned horizon
would go on. Just as great men keep people who are learned for them, who
pursue the sciences, give advice, give them sympathy, etc., etc., while they
concern themselves merely with their digestion. Thus Wolffius and other
' Ak, "rationis"; MS, "rationes" (KI, Ixvii).
* Philosophy is the science that deals with the grounds of things.
" Reading "schwer zu bestimmen" for "zu bestimmen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
° Reichsthaler.
' "Kenntniße."
q he himself said it.
18
true philosophers did the preliminary work and laid the ground for a few
supposed philosophers, and these latter do not need to do more than
acquaint themselves with it.
If we want to subdivide philosophic/,, we have tor presuppose that the
activities of our soul consist of cognition, feeling, and desire. The science
which deals with the use of the
understanding is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . logica,
which discusses the universal objects of the
understanding is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . metaphysica,
which deals with corporeal objects is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . physica,
which deals with feeling is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . aesthetica,
and the science which has to do with our actions and
desires is called . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . morals,
or . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . philosophia practica.
The first philosophia no doubt began where objects could no longer
strike the senses, and this kind of objects were no doubt the objects of
religion.
As for the history of philosophy, the following is to be noted: the Chaldeans had a philosopher in Zoroaster, and among the Persians a Zoroaster is
likewise known, who is completely distinct from the Chaldean, however.
The philosophia of the Chaldeans was very obscure and uncertain. (Thus
theology first extended philosophy, adpag. 44-)5 It stretches back into the
farthest reaches of antiquity, and what one can find out about it proceeds
from very doubtful reports. One must therefore be very cautious if one
does not want to mix up the doctrines of the ancients with the inventions 32
that were widespread5 in later times. The religion of those peoples was a
mixture' of the most nonsensical" superstition, a crude, horrible idolatry.
The priests deceived the foolish people by all kinds of tricks.1 Soothsaying, spells, interpretations of dreams, childish and extravagant ceremonies
constituted the whole of it. If there was still something good under this
crude shell, it is impossible to pick it out now. This philosophy thus has
the reputation for the most perfect foolishness, but it must have been a
dangerous foolishness too; for from the earliest times of the Roman monarchy on, the arts of the Chaldeans were banned as suspicious1" and
godless. Yetin spite of such obscurity in the Chaldean philosophy, it was
still very famous throughout antiquity. Its followers divided into various
sects, among which were: Sipparenes,1 Babylonians, Orchenes, Borsip-
' Ak, "müßten;" MS, "müßen" (KI, Ixvii).
1 Reading "ausgebreiteten" instead of "ausgearbeiteten," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
' Reading"Gemenge" instead of "Grenze," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
" Reading "widersinnigsten" instead of "wiederspänstigen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
1 Reading "Kunst-Griffe." instead of "Kunst-Griffe" with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
* Reading "verdächtig" instead of "verderblich," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
* Reading "Sipparener" for "Hipparener," with Lehmann (24:990).
19
penes, etc.6 Zoroaster is reputed to be the originator of magic, i.e., the
father of the crudest of all deceptions, of the most shameful^ superstition[;] he is said to have been killed by fire from heaven. The priests are
supposed to have instructed Belus in astronomia and physica[.] Berossus,
Marmaridius, Zabratus,2 and Teucrus are known to us merely by name.
All the philosophies of the most ancient peoples were to be found
among the priests. The Egyptians and Persians had probably been the
first whose understanding overstepped its limits and who began to make
speculations. Astrologia, cosmologia, arose before the physical sciences. The
foremost object of their investigation was the origin of things, for these are
without doubt the most important questions, and those that must have
occurred to people after they first cared for the needs of their bodies.
However, this first inquiry will of course have contained more superstition
than philosophy. This much is certain: Before philosophia had utterly and
completely separated itself from the power of the government and from
the authority of the clergy in a nation, no philosophy could really be
produced.
The originator of Persian philosophia was Zerdush' or Zoroaster. He
lived at the time of the Babylonian captivity; he was the chief of the
religion. He brought together his doctrines in a work called ZendAvesta.
His Oracle is a book forged by the neo-Platonics. The Persians' priests
33 were called magiL, and their sovereign archimagus. The doctrines of their
philosophia were the following. The highest god is the intellectual fire: to
produce the world, there proceeded from this two mutually opposed"
basic beings or* prindpia. The supreme being, from which all others
proceed, on which the law of emanation also depends, is called Mithra.
The 2 basic beings are Ormazd, a very pure, active, spiritual' light, and
Ahriman, the passive and material darkness, which is born of the limitation of light"* and bound up with it as a necessary consequence. From the
intermingling of these 2 basic beings all sublunary beings proceeded, and
so the origin of evil must be explained on earth. There will come a time,
however, when darkness will be conquered and destroyed by light. In their
opinion the soul came from the gods and, like them, was immortal. Their
moral doctrines recommended chastity, righteousness, fairness, escape
from the appetites. This they expressed thus: Thou must follow the light
' Reading "Betrügereyen, unddesschändlichsten" instead of"betrügereyen schändlichsten," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
1 Reading "Marmaridius, Zabrates" instead of "Marmaridius Zabratus," with Hinske (KI,
Ixxi).
* Reading "zwey einander widrige" instead of "andere wiedrige," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
* Reading "oder" instead of "und," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
' Reading "geistiges" instead of "günstiges," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
d Reading "Einschränkung des Lichtes" instead of "Einschränkung," with Hinske (KI,
Ixxi).
20
and preserve thyself from the plague of darkness or from the begetting of
matter.
Among the Chinese we note three great philosophers: Confucius,
Keilau, and Janzu, whom they worshipped as a 3-headed idol.8 They held
Pythagoras's opinion concerning the transmigration of souls, worship sun,
moon and stars, and not infrequently even the devil, so that he will not
harm them. Therefore they set his image on the forward part of their
ships, and wear terrifying heads on their clothing. Among the Chinese all
philosophia is nothing but morals, some astronomy and mathematics, and a
kind of political science'' and way of governing. Confucius was a Solon to
the Chinese.
Among the Jews before the destruction of Jerusalem we note some
sects, such as
1. the Sadducees, who stem from Antigonus of Sokho. Starting from discontent
with the doctrine of good works, by which one can gain nothing with God, he
came to the complete opposite, and said: one must serve God without any
hope of such reward. Zadok and Boethus understood this doctrine wrongly[;]
therefore they denied resurrection of the body and all rewards after this life.
2. the Karaites, or scribes/who rejected all allegorical interpretations of the text
and, by the way, accepted all the propositions of the Sadducees. They adhered to the school of Shammai.
3. the sect of the Pharisees[;] it gets its name from the Hebrew word paraschf 34
which means the separated people. For they believed themselves very different from the common people, partly through their science, which consisted,
however, only in false explanations of the law, partly through meritorious
deeds, which, however, were nothing more than observations of external
ceremonies and superstitious actions. Their doctrine was supported above all
by the school of Hillel.
4. the sect of the Essenes. They departed most of all from Jewish customs. The
persecutions of the Syrian kings, or rather Cambyses' invasion, gave them
their start. Their way of life was very similar to the orders of monks. They
served God in a largely only spiritual way[;] they had established hours in
which they attended to certain duties.
5. the sect of therapeutics: They flourished in Egypt and were completely monklike.4
From the times after the destruction ofJerusalem and of the temple we
note the rabbis called Gamaliel and Judah the Pious, the most distinguished originators of Talmudic doctrine. The cabalistic doctrine is in the
secret books Sefer ha-Peli'ah, Sefer ha-Bahir, and Sefer ha-Zohar. The
rabbis Akiva and Simeon bar Yohai, propagated it, but as a secret doc-
' "Staats-Wißenschaft."
f "die Karäer, Karaiten oderSchriftgelahrte."
* Ak, "peruschim"; MS, "parasch" (KI, Ixvii).
* Inserting a paragraph break, with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
21
trine. Finally the philosophia of Aristotle became mixed with them, although all the rabbis opposed this. We find proofs for this in the work
Kuzari.' The famous rabbi Moses Maimonides was well trained in this.
This mixed doctrine has much similarity with the positive and moral
theologia' that was grounded on the interpretation of divine law. Rabbi
Saadiah brought this into a system. Moses Maimonides gave it a more
philosophical* direction, and made of it 13 articles of belief, which he
named roots. The Jews in Egypt, finally, adopted the allegorical method
and even the philosophy of this country, namely, the concept of the emanations, which arose from the intermingling of the opinions of Zoroaster,
Pythagoras, and others. They sought to combine all this as well as possible
with their opinions. Among the therapeutics this doctrine was already in
full swing, and Philo followed it. In the and century, the Jews' fear of
being scattered prompted them to formulate this doctrine in writing,' and
thus they propagated these errors further and further. On this, see more
in Formey's History of Philosophy pp. 72, 184.9
35 The philosophy of the ancients contains the defect that they did not
make observations as we do now. It went thus with mathematicae, where
the ancient writings are just as invaluable, except that one did not combine
mathematics with observations of nature, which afterwards became a
cause of so many discoveries, however.
The ancients did not have any geography, or at least only a very imperfect one.
It was among the Greeks that philosophers were instructed concerning
all propositions and doctrines and the art of governing and the purpose of
their people, and there that they did something to perfect these. However
rough the philosophy that came to the Greeks, it was just that cultivated
when handed over by them to other peoples. In all sciences of the understanding and of taste, the merit of the Greeks is thus the greatest. The
government of the Greeks was formed by schools of philosophers. Among
them, however, we note especially the so-called 7 wise men. These are:
i st Tholes, who among them all deserves to be called a wise man on account of
his mathematics.
2nd Solon[,] a belletrist,"1 good poet, skilled general, and excellent lawgiver. His
motto was: Bear in mind the end.
3rd Chilon was visible and honorable among the Lacedaemonians on account of
his justice and patience. His motto was: do not learn too much, rather, learn
to know thyself.
' "Cuzzeri."
' Reading "Positiv- und Moral-Theologia" instead of "Positiven Moral-Theologia," with
Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
* Reading "Philosophischere" instead of "Philosophische," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
' Reading "schriftlich abzufaßen" instead of "abzufaßen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
™ "einschöner Geist."
22THE BLOMBERG EOGIC
4th Pittacus of Mytilene[,] a courageous and good soldier[;] his motto was:heed
the time."
5th Bias of Priene in Ionia. A righteous, magnanimous, virtuous, and clever
man. His symbolum was:Love as if you could hate.
6th Cleobulus, born in Rhodes. He learned wisdom among the Egyptians. His
daughter, Cleobulina, was heiress to his virtues and sciences[;] nothing, he
said, is better than moderation,
yth Periander[,] a prince of the Corinthians.
Democritus deserves to be called the first philosopher. He was the instructor of the great and famous Epicurus, who is among the ancients
what Cartesius represents among the moderns, and who improved the 36
previous method of philosophizing. In Lucretius we find propositions
from the Epicurean philosophy. But since Lucretius, as is known, was
occasionally absurd, he can of course have corrupted the propositions.
Pyrrho was a man of great insights. He had the saying: non liquet[,]° which
he constantly shouted at the impudent sophists to damp their pride [;] he
was the founder of the skeptics, who were also called zetetici? This sect
finally took doubting so far, and became so excessive, that it finally began to
doubt everything, even, indeed, mathematical propositions.
Socrates devoted himself to practical philosophy, which he proved especially by his conduct.
Pythagoras placed much importance on numbers[;] he held the number
10 to be the most perfect number, but others held it to be the fourth, and
they thought on account of this that God had made 4 elements. He
wanted to think everything out by means of numbers. Therefore he said,
among other things: animal est numerus se ipsum movens.1
Plato was very rhetorical, and obscure, and in such way that he often did
not understand himself.
Aristotle developed a blind trust in himself, and he harmed philosophia
more than he helped it.
Zeno was the founder of the stoical sect.
The Romans, finally, produced no particular major sects but rather
followed the Greeks.
The Arabs brought forth Aristotle's doctrine again, and the scholastid
also followed them. On some points modern times have advantages over
ancient times[;] these latter were lacking in empirical cognitions. Thus the
eventus' in nature of the ebb and flow, which was discovered in modern
times, was unknown to Aristotle.10 But the means now available for achieving this also did not exist in those times. E.g ., to travel so quickly[;] and
" "kenne die Zeit."
' Itisnotclear.
' From ^triTixog, disposed tosearch orinquire.
* An animal is a self-moving number.
' occurrence.
23
due to this lack, the extension of empirical cognition1 was held back
particularly; and these are excellent sources, after all, from which reason
ought to draw.
The ancient philosophi were in general either (i.) skeptical philosophers,
and these were misologists or reason-haters, or dogmatists[,] and all these
had their designation according to their principia[.} Among them, however, moral philosophy, natural science and acquaintance [with nature]
were poor and false.
37 Baco de Verulam, who pointed out the importance of the effort of bringing observations of nature under certain propositions. (And up until now
the external observations and external natural phenomena have been sufficiently extended, but not the internal.)
Cartesius, Malebranche, Leibniz, and Wolffius, the last of whom, through
his industry, produced a systema of philosophy, were in recent times the
ones who improved philosophy, and were its true fathers.
All the efforts of our philosophy are
1. dogmatic
2. critical.
Among critical philosophers Locke deserves priority. Wolff, however, and
the Germans generally, have a methodical philosophy.
Finally, Crusius has become famous[;] he has some good but very much
that is incorrect, and he errs particularly in wanting to prove many propositions merely from the nature of the understanding.
As far as logica is concerned, Aristotle was the first to expound it, and he
also invented the 4 syllogistic figures.
The logica of the scholastics consisted merely of subtleties.
Locke's book de intellectu humano is the ground of all true logica.
At the time of the Reformation, in France, Petrus Ramus wrote a
logic." He taught his countrymen, the French, to pronounce the quin,
quisquis, quanquam not in accordance with the French but in accordance with the Latin dialect. A great dispute arose over this between him
and the teachers at the Sorbonne, so that as this matter came to the
government, many were removed from office merely on account of wrong
pronunciation. After him Wolff, and also Crusius, wrote a logica, the latter
of which cannot make the learning of the sciences easier, however, but
rather is so obscure that another logic is required in order to understand
it.
Now, finally, the critical philosophy thrives most, and in this the English
have the greatest merit.
For the most part the dogmatic method has fallen into disuse in all
"Erfahrungs-Erkenntniß."
24
sciences; even morals is not expounded dogmatically any more, but more
often critically.
§6 38
Logic deals with the rules either of certain, or of probable, learned cognition[;] the latter is called logica probabilium: In common life we act
more according to probability than according to certainty, for which reason the logica probabilium would be very useful.
Bernoulli" wrote one, to be sure, but it is nothing but a mathematics
that is applied to cases of chance. He shows, e.g., how one can throw 8
times according to the rules of probability.
The logica probabilium has merely examples and has its use in funeral funds. The one we are talking about here, however, ought to extend
to the experience of all men,and such a one is not available.
Crusius's logica of the probable is held by many to be good; but it
contains only universal considerations, which gain regard because of their
learned tone.'3
Just as it is easier to make a circle than an ellipse, and easier to give the
rules for virtue than those for inconstancy, so can one more easily find the
rules for certain cognition than those for probable cognition. The grounds
for certainty are determined, but those for probability are not. Now it
ought to be shown, however, how great they should be if something is to
be probable,which is hard to determine.
§7
Logic can be subdivided into
ist theoretical
2nd practical logica.
Theoretical logica only shows us the rules for learned cognition, while the
practical applies these rules to particular cases.
§ 8
In thisparagraphus the author speaks of the usefulness of the doctrine of
reason. It furthers ist the learning of the sciences generally. This is to be
understood only for logic in the objective sense, namely, for a logic that is
really constituted as it properly ought to be. A logica, however, that is as 39
obscure and as excessively refined as that of Crusius cannot have this
usefulness.
It improves the understanding and reason, 2ndly, just as he who understands a language according to its rules cannot err as easily as he who has
25
learned it only ex usu. Thus he is also not as certain of the thing as the
former, and he hardly knows how to get along in matters that he has not
yet encountered. Since someone else, on the other hand, can arrange
everything according to the rules that the language prescribes for him, he
who has in view the rules by which he ought to form his understanding,
and who applies them properly, also does not fall into error as easily as he
who knows nothing of these rules.
Logic furthers, e.g., virtue. In doubtful matters one can in fact proceed
according to the rules of logic and judge whether the thing is really good
or not. It has this useful effect on virtue directe[;] it furthers virtue indirecte,
as it does all speculative sciences and cognitions, by abstracting a man
from sensible charms when he has acquired a taste for it, and even by
giving him a kind of decency. If man is to occupy himself with speculation
he must be calm, decent, and satisfied with things outside himself, and
with the help of logic this can become customary with him.
26The doctrine of reason itself
The first principal part
Of learned cognition
THE FIRST SECTION
Of learned cognition universally in general
§ 10
In this paragraphus the author wanted to give a definition of representation, but because he could not do it he helped himself out with a rhetorical
flight, as commonly happens when one can saynothing certain. He says at 40
the end that a representation acts like a picture that shows the pictorial
skill of the soul in its interior.' What representation is cannot really be
explained. It is one of the simple concepts that we necessarily must have.
Every man knows immediately what representation is. Cognitions and
representations are of the same sort. Concepts are somewhat different
from them, however, as we shall see in what follows. Cognition and
representation are taken in logic to be of the same sort. Every representation is something in us, which, however, is related to something else,
which is the object. Certain things represent something, but we represent
things. Logic does not teach us how we ought to represent something by
means of consciousness, but rather it presupposes the consciousness of
something as a psychological matter.
§ ii et 12
In every cognition whatsoever we find something material. But also something formal.
The object as we represent [it] is the material," while the manner of the
representation is called the formal. If, e.g., I represent virtue to someone,
then I can look in part to what I represent, in part to how I represent it[;]
the latter is the formal[,] the former the material in the representation.
' "inihrem innwendigen."
" Reading "das Materials" for "das Object."
27
Logic has to do for the most part with the formal in cognition. Cognitions
can have various forms in one materia, however. There are whole sciences
whose philosophy differs from the common understanding not in matter
but only in form, in distinctness[;] thus it is, e.g., with morals.
§i3
When we distinguish a representation and its object, with which it is
concerned, from other representations, then we are conscious of the
representation. Consciousness accompanies each of our states[;] it is, as it
were, the intuiting of ourselves.
Nonetheless, we are not conscious of most of our representations, of
the strongest and the most powerful. Who should represent that? We can
prescribe rules only for those representations of which we are conscious.
41 We cannot speak of consciousness in more detail here. The doctrine concerning it really belongs to metaphysica. And to have a correct concept of it,
much is taken as a ground from metaphysica.
§14
Here confused and distinct representations are discussed. If, in a composite representation, I distinguish from one another the parts of which it
consists, that is a distinct representation. But if I do not distinguish its
partial representations from one another, then it is a confused representation.
E.g., if I see a cheese mite, my representation of it is in the beginning
confused. But if I take a microscopium in hand and become aware in it of a
jaw full of teeth, 2 rows of feet, 2 black eyes, then I represented all ofthat
previously. But I was not able to distinguish these partial representations
of the limbs from the whole body. My cognition becomes distinct by
means of the microscopium, however, in that by means of it I represent the
individual parts of the cheese mite, and distinguish these from the whole
body. In just the same way,when I consider the Milky Waywith the naked
eye I distinguish nothing from anything else. I am not conscious, in my
representation, of any of the parts. But if I look at the Milky Way through
a tubus, then I see that it consists of fixed stars. I represent these fixed
stars as parts of the Milky Way and distinguish the representation of one
fixed star from the representation of another; and therefore I have a
distinct representation, because what is required for this is just that I
should distinguish the partial representations from one another, and the
partial representations of the fixed stars are partial representations of the
Milky Way.
A simple representation, and simple cognitions, cannot be or become
confused, nor distinct either. Confusion and distinctness are to be found
only in composite cognitions.
28
One principal property of logic will thus be to explicate a confused
cognition and to make it distinct.
Indistinctness is opposed to distinctness, but confusion to order. Something can be confused, regardless of the fact that I am conscious of the
partial representations, and that it does have distinctness. A distinct repre- 42
sentation is not always orderly. The more we reduce our representations
to simple ones, the more we remove confusion.
In distinct representations the material is just like that in confused
ones. In one case we represent just as much as in the other. In confused
representations, just as much as in distinct ones, we have partial representations. For if we did not have them, we would not have the total one
either.
In confused representations, however, we do not distinguish the partial
representations. A cognition can be distinct only insofar as it is a total
representation. Likewise, only a total representation can be confused. A
simple representation is neither confused nor distinct. For in such a
representation I cannot distinguish one partial representation from another. The distinct as well as the confused occurs only in total and composite representations:
Distinctness can occur
ist in intuiting, when we can distinguish well the mark ofthat which we intuit.
That is distinctness in intuition.
2nd in thinking, when we combine clear concepts and representations with intuiting. Often one can intuit something distinctly without thereby thinking of
something distinctly.
We achieve distinctness in intuition through more attention per synthesin; distinctness in concepts, however, involves the analysis of what I
think, what I already actually conceive0 in thoughts[,] i.e., the distinctness
of the understanding per analysin. All of morals involves merely concepts
of the understanding. Empirical distinctness is attained a posteriori by
attention to the objects of experience. Distinctness of reason, however, is
attained a priori by attention to the actions of my understanding.
§15
A ground is that from which something can be cognized, and a consequence is what can be cognized from the ground. We can make use of this
definition here. In metaphysica, however, we will not be satisfied with it. A
ground from which, in what follows,"1 everything can be understood, thus 43
one from which nothing is lacking, is a sufficient ground, and an insufficient ground is one where only something can be cognized. E.g., when we
° "Concipire."
* "in der Folge."
29
say that the moon has inhabitants because mountains and valleys are
present on it, this is an insufficient ground. From this one sees only that it
is possible and probable that there are inhabitants of the moon. But if,
e.g., a businessman has 100,000 Rthl. in wealth and one says that he has
made 50,000 Rthl. through trade and he inherited 50,000* Rthl., then this
is a sufficient ground. The relation of the ground and of the consequences
is their connection[.] E.g., a tree is connected with its fruit[;] the tree is
the ground, the fruit the consequence.
§ 16
Every truth has its ground, i.e., [that] by which one can distinguish it from
the false and hold it to be true. This is here in logica. Sufficient grounds
are properly spoken of in metaphysica.
If I merely know the ground of a consequence, the cognition is not yet on
that account rational. E.g., when one assigns saltpeter as the ground of a
thunderstorm. When one has distinct insight into how the consequence
arises out of the ground, however, e.g., how out of the saltpeter the
thunderstorm arises, then our cognition is rational. The author speaks
here of rational cognition3' without having previously spoken of distinct
cognition. He ought to have called it a cognition of reason,2 which itself
arises out of reason.
§ 18 et 19
All the perfections of cognition are
ist aesthetic, and consist in agreement with subjective laws and conditions.
2nd logical, and consist in agreement with objective laws and conditions.
All the requisita of these perfections of cognition are:
44 i. sensation^,} how I am affected by the presence of the object.
2. the power of judgment.
3. mindir
4. taste.
A cognition agrees with the subject when it gives us much to think
about and brings our capacity into play. This requires especially ease,
* Ak, "500000"; MS, "50000" (KI, Ixvii).
y "der vernünftigen Erkenntniß."
* "eine Vernunft-Erkentnniß."
" "Geist."
30
intuition, and this requires similia, examples, instances. But sensation has
only the 2nd position, intuition the ist. For we cannot judge by means of
sensation, but we can by means of intuition, and just for that reason the
former has the lowest position in what has to do with aesthetic perfection,
the latter the highest.
With cognition there are two sorts of perfections: (i.) that it agrees with
the constitition of the thing.
2nd that it has an effect on our feeling and our taste. The former is a
logical perfection, the latter an aesthetic, but both are formal. We have one
logic that makes and can make our cognitions* logically perfect, another
that makes and can make our cognition' aesthetically so. The former
teaches us to make representations that conform to the constitution of the
thing, which the logic that we now intend to treat does. The latter, however, which contains aesthetics, must deal with those representations that
have effect on our feeling. Logical perfection involves the distinctness of
the representation, and also that it must be rational[;] the latter is treated
in § 14.
We can say that cognition or representation in which reason is applied,
in which I cognize the grounds, is rational; but the logical perfection of a
representation requires particularly its truth. Another means to objective
perfection is distinctness. Thus a demonstration, e.g., is logicallyperfect if
the proofs adduced are sure, distinct, certain, and they agree with the
properties of the thing. But a proof can be easy, too, although this property
does not actually relate to the object but rather to the subject. With
various subjects, one and the same proof can therefore be hard for one to
grasp, yet easy for another.
OrdinaireF, one has to sacrifice some logical perfection if one wants to 45
attain an aesthetic perfection, and one has to give up some aesthetic
perfection if one wants to attain a logical perfection. Something can never
be really distinct without being somewhat hard, nor ever really lively
without being somewhat indistinct, et vice versa.
No one has yet been able accurately to combine, to determine, and to
discover the correct measure of aesthetic perfection with logical perfection. That involves much delicacy. What promotes our life, i.e., what
brings our activity into play, as it were, pleases. Something becomes easy
for us if it is in order. Order is thus a means for the agreement of our
cognition with the object with which it is concerned. Furthermore, the
new pleases us especially, and no less does the incomprehensible too, just
because it is incomprehensible, if only it is true as well. In general,
everything wonderful [pleases]. Surprise'* always has something pleasant
' "Kenntniße."
' "Kenntniß."
d "Die Befremdung."
31
for sensibility, but also something displeasing for the understanding.
Therefore do we listen so gladly to the most wonderful stories. An aesthetic perfection is a perfection according to laws of sensibility. We make
something sensible when we make the object awaken and excite a sensation, and when I make something capable of intuition. The greater art of
taste consists in now making sensible what I first expounded dryly, in
clothing it in objects of sensibility, but in such a way that the understanding loses nothing thereby. A perfection gets its worth from being communicable. At the ground of everything that has to do with taste lies a sociability/ and through this taste elevates itself very much; he who only chooses
that which pleases himself and no other has no taste at all. Thus taste
cannot possibly be isolated[,] idiosyncratic. The judgment concerning
taste is thus never a private judgment[;] from this we see[:]
ist Taste must relate to the judgment of all. Taste is a judgment of the most
universal approval.
2nd Taste involves somethingsociable, social/
Sociability gives life a certain taste that it otherwise lacks, and this taste
is itself social. When what pleases me sensibly must also please others
straightforwardly, then this means: I have taste. There are some men who
have nothing social, although they can otherwise be honest people.
46 People who live in isolation* all have no taste. In the human soul there
exists a certain prindpium that would very much deserve to be studied,
namely, that our mind is communicative,4 so that man gladly communicates as well as accepts communication. Therefore do men communicate
with one another so gladly, and seldom does man sense proper pleasure
when he cannot communicate, and communicate his thoughts and inclinations, to someone. Our knowledge is nothing if others do not know that
we know. Thus it is that man tests his judgment on the judgment of
others, and it pleases him at once if it agrees with his. It is therefore
completely absurd to say: taste is a certain private judgment by a man
concerning what he enjoys, what pleases him. Such a man has no taste at
all. Taste also has certain universal laws, but can these laws be cognized in
abstracto a priori? No. But in concrete; because the laws of taste are really
not laws of the understanding, but universal laws of sensibility. Taste itself
is an object concerning which we can engage in reasoning to some extent.'
But this reasoning does not constitute taste, but rather only increases it.
' "eine Geselligkeit."
^ "etwas geselliges, gesellschaftliches."
* "Solitarii Sonderlinge."
* Reading "Communicable, und mittheilend" for "Communicable, und mithleidend,"
with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
' "von welchem wir manches vernünfteln können."
32
The judgment of taste is: One judges concerning this or that thing by
means of and according to its look.
If a man has taste, then he sees what he chooses. That pleases almost
everyone, and thoroughlyf.]
The norm, the guideline (how something ought to be) of taste, does not
lie in the universal rules of reason, but instead is found nowhere but in
real works of taste. Hence there must be lasting models of taste, or taste
will soon come to an end. Likewise there must be lasting models of
writing style in a dead (learned) language, for these alone are unchangeable, i.e., the Latin and Greek language. Much can be clarified and
cognized a priori but yet cannot subsequently be employed.
Man is polished, refined, not by means of instruction but rather by
means of social intercourse, and especially with well-mannered, wellraised women.
Genius and taste are to be wholly distinguished from one another.
Genius works, so to speak, in the rough, but in things excellent. It is 47
desirable for school instruction
1. to work in what is rough but sublime x
2. and then to polish.
But there everything has to be and become polished equally, and more
attention is given to petty things and secondary matters than to the principal matters, and force is even used as well. Genius, on the other hand, is
seldom cultivated. But the damage that such school methods cause in
these matters is very great. E.g., in elegant Latin. One never looks to the
thoughts, but always just to expression, to the words.
Only through intercourse and society does man become polished. Models, modelsworthy of imitation, are needed to form and preserve taste. The
archetype of all perfections exists only in thoughts, however. It is an
archetypon, and merely an ideal. True beauty must be sketched, as it were, by
means of a sensibility. Morals contains the archetypon of ethical perfection.
When, in a representation, reason is not applied-' particularly, then this
is not a rational cognition [, but] it is not on that account irrational either.
E.g., when I know into what countries Europe is divided, I do not use
reason for this but only memory, and on this account it is not a rational
cognition. But what is not a rational cognition is not then irrational, but
rather this holds only for that which is against reason. E.g. If I have
acquainted myself with the movement of the planets without using reason,
it is not a rational cognition that I have of this, but neither is it an irrational
one.
A cognition that is not rational, where I do not need reason but only
"adhibiret."
33
memory, in which case I do not see how something derives from its
ground, is a historical cognition.
A perfect historical cognition, says the author in the iQth §, is a cognitio
pulchra sive aesthetica.k It is wrong, however, for him to take beautiful and
aesthetic to be the same, for aesthetics includes not only the beautiful but
also the sublime. A historical cognition is one that is not rational. When
the author speaks of a perfect historical cognition, therefore, and takes it
to be an aesthetic cognition, he can understand by this nothing but a
48 cognition which, though it is not rational, can still have a perfection. But
he thereby explained himself very badly. For who can see from this what
sort of a perfection this is supposed to be. This amounts to my wanting to
say: A periwig is that which, even if it is not exactly a hat, nor a cap, can
nevertheless be placed on the head just as well.
We have spoken first of the aesthetic perfection of a cognition and have
said that it consists in the effect on our feeling. From this we can easily
gather what an aesthetic cognition is, namely, one that affects our feeling
(by means of pleasure or displeasure). Historical cognition is a cognition
that is not rational. E.g., when someone has much acquaintance with
natural history, and he does not cognize this in connection with its
grounds, then he does not have rational but only historical cognition. In
other cases, historical cognition means a cognition that relates only to
individual things, and it is opposed to the dogmatic. But it is not taken in
this sense here. The author holds every perfect historical cognition to be
beautiful. But a cognition can be historical without being beautiful. We
can know from Homer everything mythological, even all the travels of
Ulysses, etc., and more, so that we have a quite perfect historical cognition[;] and nevertheless it will not be beautiful if it has no effect on our
feeling, if we regard everything coldly and we sense nothing along with it.
Such a cognition is only beautiful and aesthetic, as we said above, if it has
an influence on our feeling of pleasure and displeasure. In a cognition, the
beautiful is diminished when the rational and distinct is furthered.Just as
a woman's beauty vanishes when one considers it through a microscopium.
The best expressions, those that strike us most, lose their force when one
analyzes them and cognizes them more distinctly by means of the understanding. Often our understanding rejects something, e.g., various kinds
of clothes, that accords with our taste and stirs our feeling. Hungarian
clothes are much more conformable to the understanding than the
French[;] they would be better, more comfortable, etc. Item1 it is more
conformable to the understanding that the door not be located in the
middle of the house and thereby make the rooms small[;] but our feeling
requires necessarily that everything be symmetrical and that the door, e.g.,
* cognition that is beautiful or aesthetic.
' Likewise.
34
not be located at the corner of the house. Feeling is stirred by confused 49
cognition, and on that account it is very hard to observe it, so that in
general a science of it, i.e., aesthetica, has very many difficulties. Baumgarten'4 first made a science of it.
§ 20
Rational cognition has advantages over historical cognition, in that it
requires the understanding and reason. But sometimes historical cognition has advantages over rational. Historical cognition must provide the
ground for all rational cognition. The brooder who shuts himself up in his
room and wants to attain much rational cognition will not get far if he has
not first acquired historical cognition by means of experience from books,
or from intercourse, from the society of other people. Historical cognition
is given to me a posteriori^ it contains everything that pertains to rational
cognition. It shows how something is, but rational cognition shows how
something ought to be (thus it is, e.g., in morals). It only makes distinct
what historical cognition indicates. It alters only the formal. Without historical cognition reason has no materialia to make distinct. It is a great
error in our upbringing to occupy ourselves with rational cognition too
early, without yet having a sufficient historical cognition. Rational cognition, however, is not more perfect than historical cognition in all relations,
in all cases. E.g., if someone is to be excited, rational cognition will have
little or no effect.
In regard to common life, historical cognition likewise has more use,
just as the farmers in a state are more useful than all the mathematici and
astronomi. -
There is no man who does not have metaphysical judgments. A science
will in general consist of cognitions that constitute a whole.
§ 21
Philosophical cognition has the same object that historical and rational
cognition has. Only the form is different. It is indeterminate where philosophical cognition begins and rational ends.
In the same way, e.g., degree is undetermined in the case of the affects. 50
A greater degree of sensible desires is an affect. But how great this degree
would have to be is uncertain.
With philosophical cognition, now, one seeks, from the characters of
things, to have insight into the connection of their grounds and consequences. Some are of the opinion that they have philosophy, although they
really lack it, and others actually have it without thinking so. Those who
memorize definitiones from Wolff and other philosophers think they have
philosophy. They only have a merely historical cognition and actually
35
cannot philosophize at all, and think for themselves, or judge, concerning
objects. They lack the skill of at least judging a thing philosophically.
§ 22
In this paragmphus the author speaks of the perfections of cognition. He
also explains what perfection is. The concept of perfection actually belongs to metaphysica, and here it is introduced in the wrong place. All
perfection, however, is
ist practical
2nd theoretical
Theoretical perfection is actually concerned with the quantity of [cognition], as, e.g., its extensiveness, fruitfulness. But practical fruitfulness, on
the other hand, is more a perfection as to quality, as, e.g., its importance,
and beauty, and therefore it is
1. logical
2. aesthetical
Beauty is properly a matter of art. But art presupposes practice.
In all perfection what matters is always that one has before one's eyes a
purpose, a model, a proto- and an archetype. Regarding this, one can
properly judge, and say whether one thing, and which thing, is more
perfect than another. Thus it is in general with the nature of man. Anyone
who has seen many men forms for himself an archetype, a model of the
51 size, of the beauty of a man, which contains the mean on all points and for
all kinds of the human form. E.g., among many erroneous copies of a
man, the original in most cases makes and preserves the mean.
But from the putting together of manypartial beauties a perfectly beautiful thing cannot possibly be brought out. Many beautiful, varied clothes,
sewn together, would look awful. (Nulla dies sine linea[.]Apelles.1^) E.g., the
artist, the painter, etc., cannot possibly put together an archetype of a
painting, but must rather create it. Logical perfections are ones that are
perceived only when one regards the thing distinctly. Aesthetic perfections, however, are ones that are sensed by means of confused concepts.
The beauty of all good poetic representations, e.g., of paradise lost, [has]
an aesthetic perfection. It is sensed only in confused concepts, and it loses
its value just as soon as the concept is made distinct.
There are
i st beautiful objeas,
2nd beautiful representations of objects
The ugliest woman can be beautifully painted, i.e., excellently rendered, and the most beautiful woman can be uglily painted, i.e., terribly
36
rendered and distorted. Beautiful objects can occur only in objects. No
judgment at all can be made, however, concerning a beautiful cognition.
For that we have examples, to be sure, but they are not archetypes.
Models, however, are examples that come closest to the archetype.
In mathematics,propositions and theses have logical perfections [;] here
concepts are distinct. When the poet has made for me the best, most
stirring, most lively representations of spring, when he has spoken of
lowing, grazing herds, of tenderly rustling zephyrs, of fragrant meadows,
etc., etc., then my cognition is aesthetically perfect. It is beautiful, but not
distinct. I have not thereby attained any distinct insight concerning the
ground and the causes of spring. This the astronomus can and must explain for me from the course of the sun. The French observe for the most
part only aesthetic perfection. When they investigate the grounds of something, and want to have distinct concepts of a thing, then they turn to the
beautiful, stirring, and pleasing, and thereby they do great harm to logical 5 2
perfection. There are learned men who are nothing but artists of reason,"1
and imitativephilosophers of this sort are commonly very stubborn about
holding to their opinions once adopted. On the other hand, other learned
people are, as it were, so to speak, masters and lawgivers of reason.
Learning that is historical in form but rational in matter is called a
historical cognition. There are many Ciceros in philosophy, many, indeed,
who do not know at all what sort of difference there is between philosophy
and the science of philosophizing.
§23
The imperfections of cognition are also either logical or aesthetic. If the
imperfections are found in confused concepts, then they are aesthetic. If
they are present in distinct concepts, however, then they are logical imperfections. E.g. A Swiss poet says that as the Rhone runs through Lake
Geneva and yet stays clear, so should the truly virtuous go, uninjured and
unsoiled, through the masses of the wicked. Here there is a logical imperfection. On closer investigation one finds that the Rhone runs filthy
through Lake Geneva, so that it is made clear and pure by the lake.
As beauty consitutes [everything] in aesthetic perfection, a cognition is
dry, e.g., in mathematical considerations. But when a cognition is to be
beautiful, but this purpose is not attained, then it is ugly. This occurs,
however, in all writers who want to be witty, but who are not and cannot
be.
We notice aesthetic imperfections far more than logical ones. For they
are immediately opposed to our feeling. -
™ "Vernunft-Künstler."
37I M M A N U E L KANT
An historical cognition is historical either
1. materialiter
2. formaliter
To imitate someone else's science, furthermore, is called copying. There
are sciences that can be learned, which are historical as to form but rational
53 as to matter. Some sciences of reason are like this. So is it, e.g., with
mathematics. Thus sciences can be acquired, indeed, even communicated, to the degree of perfection conformable to their nature. There are
sciences to be imitated [or] to be learned," but also sciences of genius,
which cannot be learned.
Philosophy, and the art of philosophizing, cannot possibly be learned,
but mathematics surely can[.] Thus I cannot teach any man new thoughts,
wit, spirit, naivete in expression, as I teach him to write or to calculate. A
philosophy would be learned in a certain time, to be sure, if I were to
acquire it in such a way that I copied it as it was given to me[;] but then we
would do no more dian philosophize as much as we had memorized. But
we would certainly not be in any position to philosophize in the least about
what had been learned.
The principles of mathematics, on the other hand, are in most cases
intuitive, and their application takes place, likewise, according to a certain
intuitus; but this is impossible in philosophy.
The character of a true philosopher is such that he does nothing but
exercise his natural powers and capacities, by means, of course, of the
searching investigation of critique.
Philosophy can never be learned in half a year, as is commonly believed.
Philosophy belongs rather as a study for men who occupy high office, have
experience, although we think that philosophy is much easier than jurisprudence and medicine.
Philosophy cultivates the universal capacities of nature by means of
reason and surpasses all effects of these capacities. The investigation that
goes beyond all cognition inquires after the sources of the concepts of the
understanding, and their first origin. And this investigation is one of the
most important, and from this it follows necessarily that one does not in
the least learn to philosophize when one copies and learns quite exactly
the philosophy of others. One can rather profit far more if one accustoms
oneself to, and learns the science of, being able to criticize and judge the
philosophy of others. My philosophy must be grounded in myself, and not
in the understanding of odiers. It must not bind me to any original model.
The method of teaching philosophy is thus twofold:
54 ist the one that cultivates the philosophical spirit, and does not let itself be
learned or imitated.
" "Wißenschaften der Nachahmung der Erlernung."
38
2nd that which follows a certain autor faithfully, comments on him, and which
tries to use memory as an aid in philosophy.
This might do in mathematics, but not in philosophy.
§24
A cognition can be merely learned, or learned and beautiful at the same
time. In the first, one merely has distinctness as one's purpose, and this
cognition is dry. That cognition which not only teaches the understanding
but also stimulates feeling and attracts is at once beautiful and learned.
The latter cognition is, however, hardest to attain, and far harder than
the former. For if one goes only slightly too far with beauty, one immediately does damage to logical perfection. If, on the other hand, one really
wants to further logical perfection, then one becomes dry and loses the
beautiful.
To observe scholarly and beautiful cognition in an oral cognition, and
still more in a written one, can thus actually be called the true touchstone
of the learned. But who possesses this?
A perfect historical cognition, if it is to be really beautiful, is perfect not
in regard to its matter but rather to its form. E.g., an extended science of
geography is in itself historically very useful, and perfect, but still not on
that account beautiful. Instead, with the beautiful it always depends rather
on the formal, on the manner of the cognition. If, e.g., Voltaire expounds
exactiy the same historical cognition as Hübner,16 the material in the two
expositions will be one and the same, but the formal will be quite different[;] with the first it will be quite other than with the latter, namely, it will
be beautiful, and it will excite feeling.
The material,as, e.g., the distinctness and the correctness of the cognition, can in the one case be just as it is in the other. But die formf,] what
excites, delights and flatters our feeling, is different. Distinctness, then,
and correctness, concerns the material, and consequently belongs to logi- 55
cal perfection as one of its properties. The excitement, however, and
delight that pleases immediately at once concerns the formal, and consequently belongs as a property to aesthetic perfection.
In every aesthetic perfection I cognize things confusedly. Much acts on
me at once, and affects me. E.g., if in the theatrum a hero appears suddenly[,] terrifyinglyf,] frightfullyf,] and with a huge retinue, then our soul
is overcomeby that which is exciting[.] The understanding, on the other
hand, omits much that seems to it superfluous. It seeks rather only to
make its cognition as distinct as possible, and just on this account in most
cases ignores all taste, all flattering adornments[;] all make-up is left off,
and that which appears aesthetically very beautiful we regard as quite
miserable when we consider it again through the understanding alone.
39
The French nation has the peculiarity that it looks more, and most of all,
to the aesthetic[,] to external ornament. The English nation, on the other
hand, cultivates logical perfection instead. Therefore it happens, too, that
our understanding commonly learns not much, or little, from French
books (though some are also excluded from this). One remembers well,
when one has read them, that one was delighted with them as with a
[piece of] music; but one knows at the same time that the understanding
has learned nothing from them, which does not often occur in the case of
English books.
§ 25-26
These two paragraphs contain perfections of cognition in itself. Extensiveness[,] among other things, whereby many objects are cognized, is certainly a perfection[;] e.g., he who has made progress in true geography,
who knows many cities, countries, rivers, etc., by name and location, can
be a master of the so-called name-geography."
In the 26th § the author speaks of the quantity of cognition as likewise a
perfection. In every quantity whatsoever there is always a multitude, but
there is not quantity in every multitude. In every quantity I can consider
56 the extensive and the intensive. In the first case, when I consider the
extensive in a quantity, I look to the multitude of units[,] to their number,
how many of them there are. But in the other case, namely, when I
consider intensive quantity, I look particularly to the quantity of each unit.
And so it is too with cognition. If I consider, namely, only the multitude of
the objects that I cognize, then I look merely to the extensive quantity of
the cognition. But when I cognize a single object wholly and really perfectly, then the cognition is greatp intensive^. In the latter it is really a
matter of degree, of how I cognize the unit.
§27
Truth is a perfection that is included in the logical as well as in the
aesthetic perfection of cognition. It is a principal logical perfection, on
which the others all depend. When I cognize the thing as it actually is,
then my cognition is true. For aesthetic perfection, truth is also required.
Therefore Milton is reproached for representing death and sin as persons, as it were, because this is not appropriate to their constitution. But
with the aesthetically perfect we do not require as much truth as with the
logically perfect. With the aesthetic, something may be true only tolerabiliter. In this way it is aesthetically true that Milton represents the angels
° "Namen Geographie."
* Reading "groß" for "gewiß."
40
in the paradise lost as quarreling, and caught up in battle, for who knows
whether this cannot occur. A good fable must in all cases contain aesthetic truth. There is such truth, e.g., in Aesop's fable of the wolf, when
he says of the sheep and the wolf by the river that the patient lamb
replied gently to the wolf's malicious complaint, and that he made an
effort to calm its wrath, but that the bloodthirsty, unjust wolf answered,
or at least that with his vile answer he meant: In short, I am hungry now,
I have to eat you -.
§ 28
Distinctness, furthermore, is a perfection of cognition, and it has the
peculiarity of belonging to logical as well as to aesthetic perfection as a
necessary property. An extensive distinctness, which one encounters in 57
the beautiful understanding, is an aesthetically pure one[;] intensive distinctness, however,* which one finds in the deep understanding, belongs
to logical perfection. The poet describes the spring for me with extensive
distinctness. He piles marks one upon another. The philosopher, however, describes the same thing with intensive distinctness[;] he looks,
namely, not to the multitude of the marks, but rather he seeks to represent
really clearly and distinctly only a few marks, indeed, where possible, only
a single one.
Beauty of the understanding rests on the fact that one has many marks
of a thing. Depth of the understanding, however, requires only that some
marks be known clearly, and at the same time distinctly, and that it is easy
to have insight into them.
§29
The author explains certainty here "as the consciousness of the truth of a
cognition." For the time being this explanation is good enough, and sufficient. We will discuss this along with other things later on. Certainty
belongs to logical and to aesthetic perfection. The uncertain, the wavering, always displeases. For aesthetic certainty authority is often sufficient
enough. I.e., it is enough when in such a case one rests on the prestige of
great men, who believed, e.g., in the immortality of the soul, or in a future
world,[;] in this way one will be convinced enough aesthetically, although
this does not constitute a logical certainty. What great men say, who are
highly regarded in the learned world, is a ground for aesthetic certainty,
but never for logical certainty.
If a cognition is to be aesthetically true, then in this cognition much
needs to be heaped up, one thing on another, and a multitude of represen-
* Reading "intensive Deutlichkeit" for "intensive, Deutlichkeit."
41
tations need to be put forth all at once. If I want to prove, e.g., the
shamefulness of this or that deed, then I will not indicate and prove the
shameful according to morals, but rather I will ramble, so to speak; I will
show, e.g., how the fields, the trees, etc., etc., shudder at this deed, how
everything quakes, how the heavens wrap themselves in gloomy clouds so
as not to be witness to this deed, which is so abominable. He who attains
this cognition and one like it must also be blinded by the confusion of it.
Thus it happens, too, that the judgments of other people are adequate for
the certainty of the it.
58 §30
A cognition that has an influence on our will and per consequentiam on our
actions (those to be controlled by the will) we call a practical cognition.
From the consideration of all the perfections of cognition we see that
the principal capacities of our cognition are properly the following: (i.)
understanding, (2.) feeling, and (3.) desire.
If (i.) I make my cognition perfect in regard to my understanding, then, it
is logically perfect. If 2nd I make my cognition perfect in regard to my
feeling, then it is aesthetically perfect.
Finally, if 3rd I make my cognition perfect in regard to my desires, then
it is practically, or morally, perfect.
Moral perfection rests on logical and on aesthetic perfection taken together. Logical perfection includes the following three things:
i st distinctness
2nd truth and
3rd certainty.
But distinctness is the first and the foremost property, on which things
particularly depend in the case of logical perfection.
Truth, as well as certainty, help little if they are not distinct.
The 3 principal caracteres' of aesthetic perfection, however, are
ist truth
2nd certainty and especially
3rd extensiveness.
For in the case of aesthetic perfection, the cognition is not distinct but
rather confused. Nonetheless, because of what is confused and heapedup in the cognition, truth cannot even be found to a high degree in
aesthetic perfection. For it does not properly occupy my will but rather
only my taste, and just so is it with certainty, too. Not every sensible
59 certainty is aesthetically perfect, but properly only that which excites our
feeling and flatters it. One can have, e.g., the greatest cognition1 of geogra-
' French: characteristics, marks.
' "Kenntniß."
42
phy, etc., which, although it is perfect, is nonetheless not aesthetic, and
just because it does not excite our feeling.
§3i
The author draws everything together here and says that we ought to
make our cognition at once logically and aesthetically perfect. The whole
of the cognition that we possess ought to have all possible kinds of perfections. But who can achieve' this? In each part of our cognition such a thing
can very often fail to occur. If I want, e.g., to make a book logically perfect,
then I do not have to produce everywhere at the same time the aesthetic
and practical, nor can I. And if, on the other hand, I want to make a book
aesthetically or practically perfect, then I cannot always, in doing so, think
about theproduction of the logically perfect. -
Many theological propositions do not bind" our faculty of choice immediately. Thus we can leave aside much logical and aesthetic perfection
without thereby harming man. Just as a wise teacher conceals much that
he knows that is beautiful, disclosing it when he knows that the minds of
his listeners are so constituted that they want to become accustomed to
speculations and to be turned away from the practical[;] and just so too, in
certain cases, must one often abstract from the practical in one thing or
another. Many things can be true and yet still harmful to man. Not all
truth is useful. It is also certain, meanwhile, that all the harmfulness that a
truth can perhaps sometimes have is in every case only accidental. Thus
there are certainly recommendations for cognitions and judgments that
canfinallydevelop into bribery, and again there are negative recommendations,11 disdain, complaints concerning other cognitions or judgments, but
without investigating how, after all, these cognitions are constituted. To
avoid these two-sided errors, let us, in every investigation of a cognition,
take it completely alone[,] separated from all foreign questions of use or
harm, and in particular when we ourselves have an interest in this use or
harm[;] for otherwise partisanship at once states its judgment and deadens 60
all cold reflections of the understanding.
Opining has always been the fruitful source of all errors of the human
understanding.
§ 32
All of men's actions occur because of the drive toward perfection. This is
achieved, however, when our feeling is excited by pleasure and displea-
"prästiren."
"verbinden."
"Miß-Empfehlungen."
43
sure. If a rational cognition presupposes feeling," then it is a rational
pleasure and feeling.
But if it follows only from a confused cognition, then it is a sensible
pleasure and feeling. We have to make our cognition perfect according to
both kinds of feeling.
What excites our rational feeling is logically perfect. E.g., when I delight
in thorough instruction. But what excites our sensible feeling is aesthetically perfect.
In general, the horizon of our cognition practically determined is far
narrower than the horizon of our cognition logically determined.
§33
Here the author shows how logical perfections can be combined with
aesthetic ones. E.g., one finds logical perfections in Wolff and in other
writings, but no aesthetic perfections. In beautiful books, however, one
finds again fewer logical perfections, and on the other hand many more
aesthetic perfections. But the autores of such books have the lowest position. Everything that stimulates and excites us serves to disadvantage our
power of judgment.
Aesthetic perfection, especially excitement and stimulation, are in many
respects opposed to logical perfection, since the former concerns sensibility, the latter on the other hand the abstract. But in many respects, however, it is required in accordance with logical perfection, namely for what
belongs to sensible aesthetic intuition.
He who wants truly and lastingly to convince himself of the truth of his
propositions must refrain from all sensation, impression, stimulation, and
sought-after beauty. So that the reader will not believe that he wanted
merely to persuade him, deceive him, and flatter him. So that he will give
his propositions approval, because he is not in a position to prove them to
him.
61 §34
All the cognition that we possess ought to be logical and aesthetic. If,
therefore, we want to increase the logical perfections, we must not destroy
the aesthetic ones. Furthermore, if we want to promote the beautiful in
our cognition, then we must not wholly ruin the logical. If one wants to
cultivate his understanding and at the same time his taste, therefore, one
should read not merely comedies, novels, gallant tales, etc., and other
such books, where there are beautiful and aesthetic cognitions, to be sure,
but where no logical perfections at all are to be found. Feeling is of course
* Reading "das Gefühl" for "dem Gefühl."
44
excited by this and taste refined, but it is also certain that the understanding is harmed[;] in this way it becomes duller and unusable. With children
one should begin with the sensible. Geography could be expounded for
them in such a way that they always sense and are excited. Thus instead of
having them commit names to memory verbose* one could tell them instead
about the noteworthy features of the sea, particular customs of foreign
nations and peoples, etc., and not just show them on the map- that is
Paris, that London, etc. - without commenting on anything, ascommonly
happens. From history, again, one could expound for them, in the liveliest
and most exciting way, the events that have happened, so that their feeling
and desires would thereby be improved. With the more mature ages one
could also start various exercises for the understanding with them. One
could read them suitable, selected poems and good speeches and get them
to reflect on them.
But one must not force them, often before they can even think, to an
oratory which in any case is later of no use to them, except that they forget
it, as commonly happens in school; for what one has had to learn unwillingly, or even by means of force, one soon forgets by oneself. Dry cognitions,which become so popular, like reciting the names of places, emperors, dates, etc., ruin the youth to the highest degree. A child learns them
with ill humor, and he does not retain them but instead, out of fear of
punishment, seeks only to recite his lessons perfectly, etc. It is not at all his
intention that what he has once learned should always remain in his
memory. Even if one says to him that he cannot be or become happy 62
otherwise, he pays this no heed, he is fully disinterested, and satisfied
simply with his present pleasure. Detests everything that will lessen it for
him, then. Hence he will naturally retain, and seek to retain, only what
pleases him and stirs his feeling. If now everything is expounded in such a
way, then he would gladly learn everything and with pleasure be able to
retain it.
To be truthful is the greatest virtue in the world, on which all the
remaining ones are grounded, and without truthfulness all the remaining
virtues are in fact nothing but pretenses. This virtue, therefore, should be
expounded for children first of all, and at the same time they should
always be accustomed to it, if not through words, then at least through
mien.
One should strive above all things to implant in children a strong
loathing toward each and every untruth, whatever the pretext under which
one might be able to excuse it, as, e.g., toward a maggot or other vermin.
They will learn afterward in their lives gradually to accustom themselves
to lie just as little as they pick up maggots. They will always be honest and
will hate all possible pretense.
* verbosely (reading "verbose" for "verbosus," with Hinske, KI, Ixxiii).
45
Every man has furthermore a natural and for him, as it were, innate
drive toward benevolence. Just as we are glad when we can make another
laugh with our flashes of wit, we are still more glad when we ourselves
have made others happy, or have simply given them joy,pleasure, etc.
(Only a few malicious souls, who wish for, or even promote, the unhappiness of their fellow men, are excepted from this.) This, too, one would
have to know how to sustain in a child. One should, e.g., give a child
something to give to other children who are poorer, but not only after they
ask for it like beggars, since they are miserable. For by this means one
accustoms them merely to sympathy, which is very different from true
charity[;] one should have the child pass something on to others merely in
order to give it, because it is beautiful and praiseworthy to pass on what
one has left over; because they deserve it, although they do not ask for it or
do not have the heart [to do so].
If now one has taught the child this much through sensation, then this
will certainly improve his moral character. And he will take pleasure in
moral tales.
63 If one has accomplished this, then one can teach the child to read[;]
then he will himself see how the skill of being able to read helps him. He
will himself get the desire for it, he will make an effort to acquire skill, and
the sooner the better, since this reading puts him in a position himself to
read letters, poems, moral tales/ and other beautiful books, and furthermore not to need to ask others to tell him something. Now when this has
happened, then one should seek to further his historical cognition. Because this has to provide the ground for rational cognition. One should
not load him down with a terrible multitude of names[;] he naturally sees
no use in this and consequently has no desire for it.
If one presents stories morally, then he will take pleasure in this, and
will consider the names just as something secondary, but nevertheless
retain them.
One should seek, finally, to broaden his rational cognition, too, and to
further it. One should tell him the grounds when he asks the causes of
something, but not load him down with distant grounds. If he asks why no
grain grows in this or that field one should tell him,because it is sandy,
etc., but not give him any extensive explanation of fruitfulness[;] this
serves no purpose except to confuse his understanding.
§35
In this § the author says that one must let the small perfections go if
greater ones are hindered by them. Greater logical perfections must be
* "Moralische Begebenheiten."
46
put ahead of small aesthetic ones, and greater aesthetic perfections, again,
ahead of smaller logical ones.
If one follows this rule, one will write logically, also aesthetically beautifully, and will be able to express himself in an exposition.
The opposite of each perfection is in all cases of two kinds, namely, either
the contradictory opposite, if the perfection is merely lacking, or secondly the
real opposite, which abolishes completely the perfection which might exist
based on some other ground. An example of the first would be, e.g., those
medicamenta that do not help at all but also do no harm[;] these can often
be prescribed[; this] is appropriately compared with the contradictory
opposite of healingf;] but those medicines which not only have no use but 64
also do harm have the real opposite of healing. So too is it in cognitions.
The imperfection that is the contradictory opposite is called a lack[,}
and the imperfection that is the real opposite of the perfect is called a
mistake. Thus, e.g., ignorance of the immortality of the human soul is the
contradictory opposite, but the mistake, where one even believes the human soul is not immortal, is the real opposite of the cognition of immortality of soul. Ignorance lacks only grounds [;] hence it can easily be helped.
With error, however, there are real grounds that are opposed as opposing
grounds to the true cognition.
A mistake2 must therefore be much more avoided than a lack." It is
much worse if I have to remove what has actually been proved from other
grounds than if I do not yet know anything; because in the last case I can
more readily be taught than in the first. E.g., he who does not define
something at all can get by with his common cognition, whereas if he
makes false definitions and afterward applies them, there arises from this
a far greater, more important harm, which could not have arisen in the
case of a lack. In the case of vitia, however, cognition is not only not
increased but rather diminished, and that which is already there is actually
removed.
§37
Common and historical cognition can be much more perfect than learned
cognition. They are to be regarded as heterogenea, but they can also be
considered in relation to afocus imaginarius,1' e.g., whether they are lively,
fruitful, and so forth. By historical cognition we do not understand aesz "Die Fehler: vitia."
' "Mangel, Defectus."
* point at which an image is focused, e.g., behind a mirror (reading "Focum Imaginarium"
for "Focum Perfectionis").
47
thetical, but rather merely dry cognition. But this dry cognition in the case
of a man, e.g., regarding the conditions and events of his life, can be much
more fruitful and extensive than learned cognition.
A mathematicus, who otherwise possesses much cognition, will not get
65 as far in praxisL with hiS; science of engineering as another who has not
studied the theory but has acquired for himself a merely historical cognition ofpraxisL.
Machiavelli, e.g., had a great, learned cognition of how to place a whole
army in battle order, but when he was once actually commissioned to
command an army, instead of putting it in order he put the whole army in
disorder, because he had no historical cognition of the secondary circumstances.
In many respects the learned man with his solid cognition actually does
not accomplish nearly as much as someone else whose cognition is historical, because the first is not as universally useful as the other.
§38 et 39
Rousseau is of the opinion that the sciences have brought more harm than
good. We have capacities that are far greater than is necessary for this life.
Our theoretical capacities are in us much stronger than the practical ones.
We can improve the former more than the latter, and thus [arises] a
disproportion, a monster, in which the head is too large en regard to the
other parts of the body. If we did not have another life to expect, then
learnedness would certainly be more harmful for us than useful. For here
we often fail to have enough advantages for the troubles we give ourselves.
But in the meantime, learnedness has also provided us with many advantages here. Navigation, the art of ruling, etc., would surely have remained
very obscure and imperfect without it. How useful it is that by it alone as
by a light the darkness of superstition has been destroyed, and that superstition so fortunately rooted out. Many old women can now grow older
with honor and conclude their lives in peace than previously, since they
quite often came under suspicion and had to lose their lives in a miserable
way.
Learned cognition considers the universal and therefore gives occasion
for discoveries and improvements.
§40
If learned cognition is at the same time beautiful, then it is most useful/
especially in praxis^. We know the cognition of the scholastics, these dry
66 philosophers who bind themselves to a very constrained method, [we
' "die nützlichste undbrauchbareste."
48
know] how it destroyed, as it were, the moral properties and capacities of
men and lowered them to superstition. An irreplaceable loss! But of
course all of this could not be otherwise, and it all came about because
their cognition, and consequently also their expositions of morals, etc.,
were merely learned and not at the same time beautiful, but rather were
completely dry. Thus a cognition that is beautiful but not learned, and one
that is learned but dry, is harmful.
THE SECOND SECTION
Of the extensiveness of learned cognition
§ 41 et 42
The extensiveness of learned cognition is opposed to its poverty. This concerns
either the material or the formal. If someone lacks historical cognition,
then he is in complete ignorance. Thus, e.g., the ancients were in complete ignorance of the existence of the new world[;] they had no historical
cognition of it. The common man is still whollyignorant in regard to many
things. But one can also be in ignorance in regard to the grounds of a
thing: i. in that it is completely unknown to us, so that one has no
historical cognition concerning it. E.g., when one does not know at all
whence thunderstorms, rain, snow, etc. arise.
2. When one does not comprehend the nexusL of things with their
grounds, although the grounds are now known to someone. E.g., when I
know the ebb and flood have the moon as their cause, but do not yet
understand, and have insight, how it happens that the ebb and flood
proceed from the attraction of the moon.
§43
As for what concerns ignorance, this can be divided into
1. a necessary ignorance, and on the other hand
2. a voluntary one.
Where no data are given to us for settling something, ignorance is
necessary. E.g., to settle where the human soul will be after death. ItemL 67
concerning the power of reproduction for animals and men.
Third, the position we have in the world makes ignorance necessary for
us. But when because of certain moving grounds we dismiss some things
from our minds, so that we try industriously not to know them when we
see that something is too hard for us, or is useless, then this is logical
ignorance.
49
Logic is more a doctrine of skill, which belongs to the youth, but the
doctrine of wisdom belongs to the man.
§ 44
That circle within which we can see things is called our horizon. The
complex of things that man can cognize in a learned fashion without
detriment to his remaining cognitions is the horizon of his learned cognition. What lies beyond the horizon can be seen in the geographical sense.
But here it ought to mean such things as one cannot cognize even if one
wanted to, ignorance of which is necessary. We are ignorant about many
things even in historical cognition[,] e.g., about the joys of heaven, about
mysteries, because they perhaps cannot be expressed by our words[;] we
are often in ignorance about a few things because of our weak capacities,
but about other things in regard to circumstances, the time, the place.
We determine the horizon of our cognition
1. logically merely by the faculty, by the measure of our powers
2. practically in accordance with ends.
People believe it is always good to know more than they may, and that it
is better to know too much than too little. But all effort to an excessive
degree toward a purpose is superfluous, and is badly applied. It is necessary, then, that all our efforts be adequate to the ends we have set before
ourselves, otherwise man squanders the capital of his powers, which is
very limited; we say something goes beyond our horizon when it goes
beyond the capacities of our cognition.
Many more things are beyond the learned horizon than are beyond the
historical one. The former is thus much smaller than the latter. Much
68 that I cognize historically I can never cognize learnedly and beautifully.
E.g., I have a historical but not a learned cognition of the commercium
animae et corporis.d We must not get ourselves involved with all objects,
therefore, but always think about die fact that we have a horizon in
cognition. Thus it is also not necessary to get ourselves involved in investigation concerning the condition of the soul after deadi, eidier, which is
beyond our horizon.
It is very hard to determine what is really beyond our horizon. If it
frequently appears to me as if something were beyond my horizon, so that
I hold it to be an impossibility, such a thing can still in time come within
my horizon due to investigation and industry. It is the true philosophy of
the lazy when one maintains of all things that they are beyond our horizon.
But if someone says: I can of course cognize something, but I do not
need to, it is superfluous for me, or is even harmful to me, I ought not to
d intercourse between soul and body.
50
cognize it, this is as much as to say: it is beyond my horizon. One determines his horizon according to taste
1. According to the taste of the man.
2. According to the taste of the age.
But if it is true that most men draw the horizon of their cognition only
according to taste, this is only a superficial cognition, in order to seem
learned to all, to be able to be judged learned by all. But this is, as it were,
only the foam of cognition, which even involves a certain impudence.
Our age is almost one like this. But the harm from this is also unavoidable. Namely, that all sciences are finally treated only superficially.
The more a science is restricted to a single purpose, the greater the
degree of the perfection it can attain. In our times one would almost think
that everything would be refined and learned. Instead of doing rough
housework, as before, women now read fine writings. That is called being
well read, and in this they seek an excellence. But this great extension
causes science to lose its worth. The logical horizon of our capacities is
1. historical^ which is and must be the most extensive.
2. rational, but this is very narrow.
The historical horizon is to be cultivated particularlyin our youth. Yetthe 69
purpose must also be known, in accordance with which I acquire historical cognition.
He who has all historical cognition of all possible sciences is the
polyhistor.
Philosophy is the field of all historical cognition, of the theologian, the
physicus[.]
A polyhistor possesses the materials for a science, his head is a true
bibliotheca[;] polyhistory also involves philology in particular, the science of
the tools of learnedness.
The more perfect a science is to become in its kind, the narrower it
becomes. Those who have all historical cognition and all cognition of
reason are the great, universal minds, of whom there are only very few.
Every one must think that according to his capacities, be they great or
small, he has a certain determinate horizon suited to himself. E.g., he who
knows something of geometry, assuming too that it is still not much, must
and can well think that finding out how to square the circle is beyond his
horizon.
The horizon of our cognition changes with time. What is now beyond it
finally comes finally within it, if I gain more capacities and cultivate these
properly and better.
A beginner commonly thinks that nothing is beyond, but rather everything is within, his horizon, that he is perfectly well in a position to
cognize, and to settle, everything. But with time one sees the illusion and
51
knows how to limit his horizon, or else falls into the thought that everything is hard for us, or beyond our horizon.
How many are there among the so-called philosophers in name only
who are concerned only about their external glitter, and completely conceited, who in fact think they are in a position to be the teacher of a
philosophy. Yet such a thing is far beyond their horizon.
§46
Things are lowered beneath the horizon of learned cognition when they
70 are unworthy of our learned cognition. A few absurd opinions of the
ancient philosophers are not even worthy of our historical cognition, of
our acquainting ourselves with them.
By nature, however, not even the least thing is unworthy of our historical cognition, unless one should want to apply oneself very much to it, so
that one neglects more important things.
Foolishness and methods have also put a lot beneath the horizon of our
cognition. E.g., because of the foolishness of man the investigation of
urine is now considered to be almost indecent, although it quite often
serves to distinguish diseases.
§47
Things are outside the horizon of our learned cognition which are excluded from it because they make us neglect more important things.
Nothing can be outside the horizon of an unlimited understanding^] this
occurs rather only with a limited understanding.
We must use our capacities economically, so that we can apply them to
important things.
What does not belong to that science that we have really[,] honestly
chosen to cultivate is therefore outside our horizon, unless it is beyond or
beneath it.
To occupy oneself principally with foreign things, and to the neglect of
more important ones, is actually to overstep one's horizon. One can make
the historical horizon as broad as possible. Very seldom is a thing outside
the historical horizon, but rather outside the learned horizon.
As the understanding grows, more and more objects come beneath its
horizon, and this is gradually broadened.
Rousseau says, completely correctly, that all those who have written
about education, and thus most parents also, want to make of children
perfect men, whereas they ought first to make' a perfect child of them.
"bilden."
52
They place beneath the horizon of the child what actually belongs beneath
the horizon of the man.
§48 71
That which is not beneath, or beyond, or outside our horizon is within our
horizon.
The determination of the learned horizon is too difficult for a youth to
be able to make it.
People of insight, who by themselves have in their way failed, can best
determine the horizon. They will indicate to the student what is necessary,
what unnecessary, and how one can easily fail here.
It is better if one first seeks to gain insight into very many things than if
one tries to learn only a few things, and these completely thoroughly,
because this is easier for a youth and more stimulating. One should seek
first to form an overriding concept^of many sciences, then one should take
up one science after the other thoroughly. This would have the value that
when one had planned to treat this or that individual science quite thoroughly, one could comprehend the nexusL with other sciences, and with
each one could provide an elucidation with the others. It is quite wrong,
then, when parents want to determine the horizon and the manner of life
for children still in the cradle. When, e.g., they want to conclude, from the
fact that it has a serious expression, and that it can cry and scold well, that
it will be well suited for the pulpit[;] and because another in his youth
would happily investigate all things, and analyze them and take them apart,
they surmise that someday he must become a skilled anatomus.
§50
Ignorance is always an imperfection and can therefore certainly never be
praiseworthy, but it can well be beyond blame, when one renounces certain objects in order not to neglect, on their account, more important
cognitions.
Leibniz could have had a blameless ignorance in many things. E.g., in
chemistry, in antiquities, and in general in very many other things, which
overload a great genius far too much.
§ 52
Ignorance can be divided into common and learned ignorance. For a
learned man to comprehend properly that he knows nothing, great
learnedness is required.
f "Haupt-Begriff."
53
72 Quantum est quod nesämus\s But no one has cleverer thoughts than a
beginner. For he does not yet understand at all what it means to know
something, that is, [to know] little or much or nothing. Also, he does not
himself know whether he knows something or not. But with time one
learns to appraise one's insights, and to see that they still have very great
shortcomings and imperfections.
Socrates held it to be his greatest learnedness that he saw that he knew
nothing. - A beginner believes he can define and demonstrate everything,
but he does not see at all that so many materials are a labyrinth for him[;]
but he comes to cognize this when he possesses more learnedness. The
learned man is in many things just as ignorant as the common man. He is
in a position, however, to philosophize concerning this ignorance himself,
and to be able to indicate its ground and its degree.
When one has undertaken many investigations, has learned much, has
inquired into much, only then does one first come to cognize his ignorance. Who represents to himself that we know only a mere external
determination concerning substances, and no other? The only one who
knows this and is in a position to see how small, how defective and
imperfect, all his cognitions are, is one who has walked enough through
the fields of learnedness.
§53
A cognition which is extensively great, or which comprehends within itself
very many objects, the author calls polyhistory. Those who study for the
sake of gallantry commonly apply themselves to this polyhistory. Their
cognition is like a great land, which contains many white places,1' and
which for a long time has not been able to be as fruitful as that land which,
though admittedly smaller, is on the other hand better cultivated.
§55
A cognition becomes full and complete when it is sufficient for a certain
end. It is exact when it contains nothing more than is required for the end
that this cognition has.
Many a preacher can have cognition sufficient, e.g., for the schoolmaster's office, although not for that of the preacher. He would surely have
73 become an excellent teacher, but now he is a miserable preacher. On the
other hand, many a schoolteacher, who at the moment can manage his
office only badly, would have become a better preacher than he now is a
schoolmaster.
How much is that of which we are ignorant!
54
§56
He who simply skims over learnedness, who only acquaints himself with
everything historically, so that he can talk about everything in society, has
only meager learnedness and, as it were, only a skeleton of it.
Such a one is worthy of contempt to the same degree as one who makes
a great show with his clothes, but who, because of a shriveled stomach or
some other disease, and of miserable circumstances, feels the greatest
agony.
He who possesses a meager cognition can never satisfy himself, and
sees that it is only a delusion.* He cannot be satisfied and pleased with
himself. He is not in a position to enjoy himself. He has to seek out others,
go among others, and he takes pleasure in the fact that at least others,
though ignorant, consider him learned.
§57
One must always strive to broaden his learned cognition. If we do not go
forward, then we are sure to fall behind once and for all.
One must have an immediate inclination toward learnedness if one
wants constantly to increase it and never to let it fall into decline. But
commonly one acquires thereby only as much as one needs to get bread
and to be able to live.
§58
We would surely not overload our heads with learnedness and do ourselves harm if we observed this properly and took the easy before the
hard.
It would be better if one might expound all the sciences first in a very
easy way; so that one would not need for this much beyond the common
use of the understanding. Once one had thus expounded the sciences,
one could then expound them in their complete perfection and acuity,
which commonly occurs at the beginning, even though this perfection is 74
not needed by all, and much harm frequently arises from it.
Many would be satisfied with a provisional exposition of the sciences in
the beginning, e.g., in accordance with Gesner's Isagoge,1* rather than with
a more extensive exposition of them, which on that account becomes
obscure and difficult.
* "ein Blendnuß."
55
§59
Hippocrates wisely says: ars longa, vita brevis.' Indolent people commonly
complain about the length of the time they have left to live. But the time
that they have spent being completely inactive and dreaming seems to
them to have been fleeting and appears very short, because they did
nothing in it and consequently can remember nothing at all important that
happened then.
Many sciences are of such a kind that, with the passage of time, human
capacities will be overstepped by their extent.
Thus history, e.g., is already very extensive[;] with time and its duration,
more and more is always happening. More and more events are always
occurring in the world. These all add to history, and this science finally
will thus become extensive and grow, so that our memory will finally be far
too small. For it is already quite hard now.
Perhaps it will go similarly with mathematics. For what it contains now
is already quite large enough for our capacities. Perhaps with the duration
of time it will thus become so great that our successors will not dare to
venture upon it.
Perhaps in time mathematical writings will stand like the Egyptian
pyramids, which no one imitates, but which only recall those who passed
away in an earlier time.
But although learnedness is so extensive, our life is still long enough for
us to see properly what all is around us, if we wanted to apply all our time
toil.
To earn bread is an ignoble, unworthy end for learnedness. Great
insights are not at all useful for earning bread. A small measure of
75 learnedness, hardiesse,' the art of disputation, the shamelessness of advancing oneself and of diminishing other great minds, are best suited for
earning bread: anyone can attain office except the worthy.
§61
To guard against forgetfulness, the author says, one must learn much, so
that one will still know something, even if one has with time forgotten
something - so that one will not just be stripped of all knowledge.
But it is probably best if one has attained the skill of being able to
philosophize concerning objects by oneself, and of being able to cultivate
the sciences. He who has this, is like a musicus who has forgotten all the
pieces he had learned but can play whatever is set before him and can
himself compose.
' Art lasts long, life is short.
' French: boldness, impudence.
56
§65
A learned man who brings his science to bear in company is called a
pedant, but to be this, someone must really possess a skill, which he seeks
to bring to bear everywhere, even given that it frequently does not fit. He
must not be completely dumb and ignorant, however. In all conditions of
life there can be, besides learned people, also pedants. Among the nobility, e.g., there are pedants of the hunt, who talk of nothing but their hunt,
dogsf,] foxes who have played pranks on them, haresf,] roe, stags, etc.
Thus there are pedants of finery, who cannot be angry enough, and
who know and can find no end of complaining, if a manchette,k or a lock, or
a ribbon, is damaged or tangled. In society one is called a pedant if, in his
conversations, he brings to bear unnecessary investigations, and distinctions, which would be more suitable for the podium than for a society for
entertainment.
In learnedness one becomes a pedant when one always wants to define
and to make unnecessary qualifications. The methods used today to instruct women are ways of making them pedants.
Charlatanism involves thinking oneself great and acting proudly and 76
setting oneself above others, when one has little insight.
The mathematical method with which in earlier times people boasted
and tried to be thorough was nothing but a kind of charlatanism. To play
or to show off with one's demonstrations, or with one's wit, is also charlatanism.
To avoid this properly let one acquire thorough learnedness. If this has
happened, one will thus at once become aware of and have insight into
how much we lack, and how little we have cause to boast of our modest
sciences and cognitions, but instead how much cause we have to call out
with humility: quantum est, quod nescimus.1
THE THIRD SECTION
Of the quantity of learned cognition
§ 66-91
In the foregoing Second Section we spoke of the extensiveness of learned
cognition, but this actually pertains to the quantity of cognition. Thus the
author has done wrong in dealing with the extensiveness of cognition as
well as with its quantity in separate sections.
In the previous section we actually considered what is extensive in
French: cuff.
How much is that of which we are ignorant.
57
cognition, and now it remains to consider what is intensive in it. In this,
however, the author draws a completely unnecessary distinction.
The degree of dignity with which we have insight into things depends
especially and first of all on our choosing the right things. To this pertains
correct taste, and good feeling, by virtue of which one is able to choose
important objects, which have many or few consequences, but important
ones.
The concepts of politeness and impropriety"1 do not have great consequences in common life, to be sure, but they do have many, and are
therefore of great importance.
77 What is lacking in importance in one or some consequences is often
made up for quite well by the multitude of the consequences.
The correction of error, of conscience, on the other hand, has few, but
great, consequences.
Furthermore, it pertains to the dignity of our insights that we not apply
too much effort to a thing, and withdraw our industry from other objects,
when this is actually not so necessary. The art of correctly estimating the
importance of cognitions involves especiallygood feeling and true correctness of imagination. I can easily show someone else the consequences, but
one cannot teach him to feel the magnitude of these consequences.
Concerning metaphysica, I can say to him that he will receive clarified
concepts of his soul, of providence, of the highest being, of the world. But
if he is without feeling in regard to this great gain, then no description will
help him at all.
A cognition is great insofar as it has a universal use, but all these
cognitions are disadvantaged in that although their use is great and one
cognizes many things by means of them, one cognizes all that much less in
these many things themselves.
I think little about many objects.
But there is another cognition, by means of which one cognizes much
in few things. The previous mistake arises in most cases from the fact that
one thinks always in abstracto, and from this many other [mistakes] arise.
Baumgarten says: beauty is perfectio phaenomenon, perfection in appearance. But can one from this explanation actually observe beauty in objects,
in cognitions? By comprising much under itself, a cognition comprises
that much less in itself. The lack of a cognition is not always blameworthy,
if only the lack does not contradict a given purpose. But as soon as this is
so, then from this lack arises an error. From this by itself it follows that
those who promise to give a definition of a thing run the risk that one will
immediately fault" them for the slightest missing characteristic, which one
would not have done if they had indicated that they did not intend to
* Reading "Unanständigkeit" for "Unbeständigkeit."
* "imputiret."
58
develop the matter completely but only to explain it in a wayappropriate to 78
a certain consideration. It is likewise with demonstrations and proofs.
The limits we set for our desire for knowledge are so necessary that
without them we can scarcely cognize another science properly. To get to
the point where we are in a position to cognize a cognition completely,
then, we must voluntarily impose on ourselves, as it were, an arbitrarylack
in regard to other cognitions that are perhaps opposed to this cognition,
i.e., a kind of ignorance of them, so that we can turn all our energy to this,
and comprehend it quite perfectly.
Lacks0 are nothing other than limits of a thing that ought to begin there.
They are its termini, restrictions, and the lack actually subsists quite well
with the perfection of a beginning.
The evaluation of cognitions does not involve any acuity but only feeling. Mathematics can be very acute but nonetheless have no taste for
metaphysica or some other logical, or moral, investigation.
Cognitions frequently seem to us to be dry and of no value. Afterward,
when we once wander through them and penetrate into their interior,
their advantages are soon revealed. Thus, e.g., electricity was nothing but
a fine toy; afterwards, however, it showed itself to have the use that it now
may help to cure some diseases. Perhaps with time we will even be able,
with the help of electricity, to drive away thunderstorms.
Euclid thereby discovered many properties of the circle, and only with
time were the extensive advantages of this seen. Many things have come to
be despised and contemptible only on account of misuse. E.g., the
Wolffians have spoken so long and so much of monads that they are
ridiculed by comic poets.
The expressions monad, best world, sufficient and insufficient ground,
are so dishonored by the learned crowd that now one actually hesitates to
avail oneself of them. Much that is in fact possible and good can also
quickly be made ridiculous and represented as absurd.
Thus, e.g., Voltaire ridiculed Maupertuis's diought when the latter
holds that the Egyptians should have dug holes*1 in the earth rather than
pyramids in order to make an immortal name for themselves,1« so that he 79
comes to be completely ridiculous, although he was perhaps one of the
greatest men of his time.
Meanwhile, no one wishes to apply his learnedness to useless objects, nor to take it along in common society, as has happened, e.g., with
the doctrine of the best world, which was finally applied to everything
possible.
Finally, it is to be noted that much is taken to be useless cavilling
"Die Mängel Defeaus."
Reading "Löcher" for "Bücher."
59•
because one is too weak for it and is not in a position to be able to have
insight into it and to cognize it.
"As one often despises a beautiful woman because he has not won her
in accordance with his pleasure, and as the fox proclaims the grapes to be
unripe when he cannot snatch them. - "
One can never, or very seldomly, have insight into, and know in advance, every use of this or that cognition.
Did Euclid ever think, when he discovered his propositions, that from
these propositions one would discover the distance of the heavenly bodies?
The author says that lesser truths* must not be neglected, since they are
frequently useful in connection with principal truths. Because a cognition
is hard, it is not just for that reason to be valued highly.
Because something is imposing, it sometimes pleases even though it has
no use. This includes, e.g., the sophistical fragments of the scholastics,
the fallacies, the 4 figures of the syllogism. One of the scholastic learned
men is supposed to have made himself so thin by studying the sophistical
proposition called the liar that he finally had to wear lead soles, so that he
would at least have some weight, and a strong wind would not knock him
down and hurl him off the bridge.
When many details come together they finally constitute a great cognition.
A cognition can be great on account of its many consequences, even if
these consequences are not great and important. Thus is it, e.g., with
calculation.
What is great for one is small for another. The Latin language, like
metaphysical questions and investigations are important and great for
learned men.
80 For women, however, these are unnecessary. For noble people too[,]
princes, etc., not all cognitions are necessary[;] rather, in many sciences
and on many matters they can rely on the learned, as one who does not
understand this or that craft relies on the craftsman when he commissions
him to make a thing. For such gentlemen as princes, etc., it would be
unnecessary to go far into metaphysica and its investigations.
Instead one should instill in them true learnedness, which is necessary
for them, that is, one should teach them first and foremost justice, the
worth of man, of their subjects, hatred of flatterers and flattery, true care
of the citizens of their land, and to distinguish the true from the false
interests of the state, and one should properly imprint the cognition of all
this in them; then some of those monarchs who are now of evil sentiments
will be full of noble magnanimity, and of sublime sentiments worthy of
their position. We will have happy princes, subjects, and countries. In
* "Zwischenwahrheiten."
60
accordance with its feeling, a great mind does not occupy itself with small
matters[;] he comprehends what is important and chooses it as his object.
THE FOURTH SECTION
Of the truth of learned cognition
§ 92 et § 93
The universal highest question of someone who wants to learn logica is
quite naturally, What is truth?
Now to answer this question, which is so appropriate to the understanding of man, and in particular of a beginner, will cause more difficulties
than one would think, and there have been people who have seen that we
are actually not able to give any distinct, complete, precise concept of it.
It has always been so[;] none of the ancient Roman jurists, e.g., was
really able to say what is right and not right' (quid sit jus), and nonetheless 81
the concept that we have of it is complete enough for use and sufficiently
good enough.
But to see the difficulties that can arise with the concept of truth, we
observe the following: First, if a mark1 of truth is to be given, then a
judgment[,] a rule[,] will have to be given. Thus the highest criterion
cannot be given.
If a cognition does not agree with the character of the thing that we
want to represent and to cognize, then it is false, in that it cannot subsist
with truth. If on the other hand a cognition is in conformity with the
character of the thing that we represent, then it is true.
The skeptic, on the other hand, said: Something is true if it agrees with
the object, but I cannot have insight into this unless I first consider and
cognize the object. Hence this amounts to nothing but the fact that the
cognition of the object agrees with the cognition of the object. But this is
identitas[J idem per idem' - nothing, the skeptics said[; it] is a circle in the
explanation of truth. This argument is called a diallelon, and since the
skeptics concluded thus, they drew the main conclusion that any distinction between the true and the false is nothing.
In the case of false cognition, I do not cognize or grasp the thing itself,
which I want to represent, but instead another. E.g., if I represent the
polyp as a worm, then I have a false cognition of a polyp.
False learned cognitions are ones that ought to be learned, or ones that
seem to be learned, but are in fact not so. This always happens, however,
"'was recht, und nicht recht sey."
"Merckmahl Criterium."
identity!,] th£ same through the same.
61I M M A N U E L KANT
when one clothes indistinct, common cognitions in termini occulti, through
which one really does not get a correct concept of the thing at all, however,
but merely an explanation idem per idem. E.g., if one were to ask about the
cause of the propagation and the increase of human and animal understanding, and if one wanted to have a distinct concept of how this comes
to pass, then the ancients said with an affected, learned mien: the cause of
the propagation of men and animals is the vis plastica, the power of
propagation.
One imagines that one has given an actual ground of the thing, then,
82 but in fact says nothing more than what one actually asked and wants to
know, although in other words.
One clothes the concept of such a thing somewhat differently, puts a
plume on it, so to speak, and then values it excessivelyhighly.
In the writings of the ancient philosophers we quite frequently find
such qualitates occultas, and in the writings of Crusius they are as frequent
as they ever could have been among the ancients. He says, e.g.: something
is true because no one regards it as, or can hold it to be, other than true.
The one says just as much as the other, thus it is a qualitas occulta.
Now if we do not want to be asked further" about the cause of this or
that, then we often state a ground which, however, is not one. E.g., if I ask
why this [man] yawns [when he] looks at that [man yawning], the ancients
said somberly, the ground of this is sympathy." But this word indicates
nothing other than shared feeling."" Thus they said nothing except that it
happens because the one must share feeling with the other. But how is
this brought about in the case of yawning? Hence they thereby explained
nothing.
With the truth of learned cognition it is also a matter of the formal. The
cognition itself must actually not be a common, but instead a learned
cognition.
The material in a cognition can quite frequently be true, the cognition
can be in conformity with the thing, and thus as a common cognition have
truth.
But if the same cognition is supposed to be learned, though actually it is
not so, then it will thereby become a false learned cognition.
To extend qualitates occultae is the death of philosophy. One believes,
then, that one possesses an actual learned cognition, although in fact it is
nothing but a common cognition.
What Crusius says of probability in his writings20 is quite pleasing to
very many. But in fact it is nothing but what we already know through
Reading "Wenn man sich nun"instead of "Wenn man nun," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
"die Sympathie."
"ein Mitleiden."
62
merely common cognition. Only it is expounded with a certain pomp,
which is aways very characteristic of Crusius.
Thus it follows naturally that it carries the illusion but not the essence
of learnedness and of a learned cognition.
The first thing in every thing, cognition, science, art, etc., causes great 83
difficulty.
Truth and error are never found in concepts but only in judgments. He
who never judges will also never err, then, but he will never speak a truth,
either.
The concept is always the datumL, regarding which I am to judge.
Concepts are the materials for judging.
There are methods for avoiding all errors, but these are so simple that
just for that reason one does not pay attention to them. However, they
consist briefly in this: do not judge so much, do not decide often, indeed
quite seldomly, except in certain cases where it is also necessary. Do not
always settle whether something is true or whether it is false; rather/ do so
seldomly.
There is a certain moderation in thinking and in judging, then, and it is
needed in order to avoid error.
But how many philosophers of our times like always to decide.
To this impudent maintaining of accepted or even of concocted opinions, to these deciding judgments^ concerning propositions of reason,
which were already familiar to the ancients, Pyrrho responded: "non
liquet."z —Many authors entwine themselves in doubtful circumstances of
this sort by means of deciding judgments and secondary thoughts," which
are often understood as errors.
A home-made remedy11 against errors is to distinguish nothing, to judge
little, and thus it happens that one finds that a village full of farmers has
fewer errors by far than an academy of sciences[;] thoughtlessness protects them against errors.
But then if we want to avoid all errors, we will have to decide to leave
many [things] unconsidered.
This tells us, and just indicates, what the restrictions on our judgments
are, and one has to judge concerning just these restrictions. If one had
extremely important ends, however, so that every error, even the smallest,
would be dangerous, then it is of course better to stay in one place, and
merely to judge regarding what concerns our opportunities^] thus it is,
e.g., in morals.
Reading "immer, sondern" for "immer, und," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
y "entscheidenden urtheilen."
It is not clear.
"Neben Gedancken."
* Ak, "Hauptmittel"; MS, "Haußmittel" (KI, Ixviii).
63I M M A N U E L KANT
Ignorance is an empty space in our head and on account of this it does
not hinder any true cognition/ [even] if it does not extend it.
So long as our cognitions are only speculations, we can still probably
84 dare to err, but as soon as an error becomes harmful, and this happens as
soon as it enters the practical, then it is very dangerous to retain it.
Judgments are actions of the understanding and of reason.
But the senses do not judge[.] Not all concepts arise out of the understanding, but some from the senses[;] all judgments, however, come
merely from the understanding.
Often men hold a certain judgment of their understanding to be a
sensation, and representation of the senses, although in fact it is anything
but that.
There is no disputing about sensation. It is a datum^ and not yet an
error. But often such a sensation is actually the judgment of the understanding on the occasion of such sensations.
Appeals to such feelings and sensations are nowadays very fashionable[;] often some people want to feel and to sense right and wrong
authoritatively/ and in fact by means of an inner moral feeling peculiar to
themselves alone. Ridiculous. The understanding must necessarily be at
work in this.
Truth is nothing but the agreement of a cognition with the laws of the
understanding and of reason[,] and on the other hand the opposition of a
cognition to the laws of the understanding and of reason is falsehood.
No power in nature deviates in its actions' from its laws or conditions,
under which alone it can function[;] thus the understanding taken alone
cannot possibly err.
All judgments agree with the laws of the understanding^] alljudgments
of the understanding are thus true. Even in our erroneous judgments the
understanding must always have done something, and in this, then, it
cannot be that everything is false, but rather something must always be
true.
It is completely impossible for a man to err completely when he judges.
In error, then, there is still truth. But we judge then in a mixed way, and
run together the effects of the remaining powers of the mind, and from
this arises the erroneous, which is so contrary to the understanding, and
about which we nonetheless think falsely, and often believe with complete
certainty, that it is an effect of the understanding. Although it is in fact
nothing but, as it were, a bastard of sensibility and the understanding.
85 Now since, as we have shown, no judgment occurs without an Ingrediens
of truth, it follows necessarily from this that we will have to moderate our
' "Kenntniß."
' "meisterlich."
' Reading "in ihren Handlungen" for "nach ihren Handlungen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
64
judgment concerning the critica of truth, and concerning the judgments
and also errors of others. For it is a certain prindpium: We can never arrive
at truth when we are always disputing, when one is always contradicting
the other.
Every discovery of an error that is in fact crude and obvious is very sad.
One would prefer not to make such sad discoveries, then, [but instead] to
help one another mutually and in friendship, to support each other, and
not always to act against the other.
Thus instead of contradicting a thing, one will have simply to investigate whether there isn't actually a truth to be found in it, [and] what needs
to be supplied [; one will have to] act in every case in a social way, and then
to make comprehensible to the one who errs, in a way that is least biting
and is instead loving, how it is not surprising that he was able to err so very
easily.
This lazy way of judging, this good-heartedness of sentiment that is so
fitting, is just as necessary for the attainment of honest^cognition as it ever
may be in common life.
But naturally, therefore, there is no total error. Otherwise the understanding would have to contradict and act against itself and its precepts.
Errors, however great and important they seem, are alwaysonly particular/
One cannot instruct anyone except through what remains of the understanding that is still in him. One cannot improve a person except through
what remains of the good that is still in him.
In instructing the understanding and improving the will I must of
course always presuppose something true and something good.
Any other man's judgment is always a judgment of one of those men
whose judgment, taken altogether, is my judge and is the greatest judge*
of the products of my understanding.
A contradiction is of course nothing but an occasion where one says
yes, but the other, in contrast, says no.
It follows that this must naturally to a certain extent disturb any rational 86
man. But it is a universal duty of a philosopher in such a case always to aid
humanity universally and to think generously: these opinions, seemingly
so bizarre and absurd, are perhaps not as badly thought, not as absurd, as
it may seem.
Everything that unifies men and makes them sociable' actually contributes much toward furthering the perfection of the whole of the human
race. Conflict, however, produces nothing. It holds everywhere, and so in
the whole world, among the learned:
"rechtschaffener."
* "particular."
"Beurtheiler."
"verträglich."
65
Concordia resparvae crescunt[,] discordia dilabuntur[.]'
Furthermore, the restrictions, i.e., the narrow limits in which the human understanding is enclosed, are not to be regarded in the least as
sources of errors, as so many supposed philosophers hold; they are in fact
causes of man's ignorance on many matters, to be sure, but not of error[;]
but as soon as one combines with this ignorance a self-conceit[,] an
audacity[,] a learned pride in judging more than one knows and is in any
position to know, error can arise from this.
The only cause of error, then, is the unsuitable arrogance of overstepping the restrictions, and limits, of one's own understanding.
The understanding alone does not err. The senses alone do not err
either[;] they are passive and do not judge at all.
Only the human understanding judges.
Hence there must also exist certain materials*for judging.
The understanding must necessarily combine with sensibility in order
to be able to judge, and this does not depend in the least on the faculty of
choice[.]
Naturally, too, there are subjective conditions of our understanding and
our thinking. And all of these we account to sensibility.
Sometimes the understanding is, as it were, in a certain way perplexed.
Its horizon is completely foggy, but since concepts must always be fur-
87 nished' for the understanding and laid out for its selection, we see quite
well that sensibility must always assist the understanding^] but often this
just does not happen enough.
All distinguishing of the true from the false involves the cognition of
inner sense[,] i.e., I must be and become conscious what really lies in my
concept, and what I think.
Inner sense is often dull, and its horizon shrouded in fog, and it does
not give us enough help.
Meanwhile, though, inner sense also belongs to sensibility, but without
it the understanding cannot judge, so the understanding must judge with
the help of sensibility[;] and just this connection and mixing together of
the understanding with sensibility is the source of all errors, namely, the
effects of the understanding are taken for effects of sensibility.
As we see, then, the understanding and sensibility cannot err alone. So
we see how an error is possible.
All errors are, so to speak, crooked lines, which we determine while
being driven from the one side by the understanding, from the other side
by sensibility.™
' Through concord small things grow, through discord they fall apart.
* "Materialia, Stoffe."
' "fourniret."
™ Reading "von der Sinnlichkeit" for "vom Irrthume."
66
We see before us the play of things in the world, but we do not have, on
this account, any complete concept of their movement.
The senses do not judge. Inner sense, which alone teaches us, through
which we become aware whether we have all the requisita of cognition or
not, does not always serve us properly, and from this arises a semblance,
as though the objects themselves lack something for their cognition.
One can have, e.g., correct rules for calculation, and for all that still go
wrong in carrying them out. Here there is commonly an error of inner
sense[;] this happens due to oversight.
The only means of avoiding error, then, will be for me to discover
certain criteria by which, in every judgment, I can properly distinguish
what comes from the understanding from what outer or inner sense
supplies" us.
But the understanding, abandoned by inner sense, judges at once, no
matter what comes of it, if inner sense offers it either something wrong or
nothing at all.
All criteria of truth are either
A. internal or
B. external.
The former areobjective criteria, which contain the ground for whysome- 88
thing is really true or false. The others, however, [are] subjective criteria[,]
which contain certain circumstances, by means of which one is in a position
to make a supposition about the truth or the falsehood in a thing.
§94
That by which true cognitions are distinguished from false ones is the
mark of truth.
The principle of identity is the formal mark of truth in affirmative
judgments, the principium contradictionis in negative ones.
Material marks are the notae intermediae, by which I prove a judgment,
the prindpia materialia.
In a completely simple" idea neither truth nor falsehood is to be met
with, naturally. Instead this occurs only where there is comparison.
When I attribute to the thing a mark that either contradicts it or is even
completely contrary to it, or when I deny of it a mark that is identical with
it.
That by which I cognize that the comparison with the thing is or is not
correct is called the nota intermedia (principium materiale)[.] E.g., if I want
to prove that a body is divisible, then I assume a nota intermedia, that it is
"Suppeditiren."
"einfachen, und gantz Simplen."
67
composite, and infer in the following way: everything that is composite is
divisible, atquip every body is composite, ergoL every body is divisible.
Some propositions are so constituted that they have in diemselves no
material mark of truth at all but instead bear only the formal mark. These
are actually the immediate judgments that we have of a thing and can
prove and derive from nothing more. E.g., that a body is composite.
Simple concepts have in themselves the mark that they are always true.
E.g., if I represent the moon as round, this is a true concept because I
actually think it thus.
But if I compare diis representation of the moon with the representation of other planets, if I doubt whether the moon is round or oval, then in
this I can easily err, and my cognition can as well be true as false.
89 §95
Among all the marks of truth the first internal sign, or principal mark of it,
is internal possibility.
We are instructed by experience concerning the possibility of many
things, which one otherwise would actually not have held to be possible.
Nevertheless, possibility is far from being a sufficient ground of truth:
because something is possible, and we can represent it to ourselves and
think it through our reason, it is not therefore actually true.
But possibility is at least a ground of probabilityf;] if something is possible, and can be thought by us, then we at least believe and hope that it can
be true, assuming that we are not also in a position to maintain it with
certainty.
Impossiblity, however, is on the contrary always a sufficient9 ground for
the infallible proof of the untruth or falsehood of a thing.
When we have insight that something is completely impossible, then
commonly we immediately hold it to be false, too.
But in this regard it is to be noted, too, that in both cases we can err.
Quite frequently we hold something to be useful and per consequentiam
also to be true and correct, which, however, when we investigate it more
closely, is actually wholly impossible and false. And on the contrary, again,
we hold something to be impossible and false which is actually possible,
and at the same time true, or where not true at least useful.
§ 96 et 97
If the consequences of cognition are true, then the cognitions themselves
are also true. E.g. It is true and settled for all that there are fire-spewing
p but.
* "zureichender, und Sufficienter."
68
mountains, warm baths, etc. As this is true, it can also be true that there is
a central fire in the earth.
To be sure, we can with some ground infer from this the central fire in
the earth, for these fire-spewing mountains, warm baths, etc., can with
much confidence, indeed, even with probability, be regarded as conse- 90
quences of such a central fire, and from the consequences one can quite
frequently correctly infer the ground.
If all the consequences of all of a cognition are true without exception,
then the cognition is certainly true too. For if any falsehood at all were to
be met with in the cognition, then there would have to be falsehood in the
consequences as well. But if this is not so, dien nothing in the cognition
can be false.
If, e.g., we are informed in the newspapers of a successful battle, and of
the victory of a hero; if this is even published from the pulpit, if we
encounter festive events and if festivals of thanksgiving are held, in short,
if all its consequences are true, then the battle itself must also be true.
Sometimes, however, we cannot cognize all the consequences of a
thing, and then sometimes a few false ones may have mingled in with
them and be present. Although we take the cognition itself to be true.
E.g., if we assume the central fire situated in the earth, then from this it
will follow again, that the layers of the earth which are not far removed
from this central fire would be completely withered and destroyed by this
much too great and violent heat, and that they would finally have to
collapse.
But since, as one quite well sees, this consequence is false, it is quite
easy to observe that the central fire cannot be taken to be completely,
undoubtedly certain and cannot be reliably maintained.
If a cognition is to be possible in connection, then it must have correct
grounds and consequences that are important as well as true.
§ 98 to 99
Cognition of the possibility of a thing arises out of experience[;] reason
can contribute nothing to it. E.g., that the magnet attracts iron.
We can comprehend the possibility of composite bodies through reason, if we are convinced of die possibility of simple effects.
But the first possibility of causes and effects becomes evident only
through the senses from experience. Therefore reason also yields no 91
objection to the impossibility of a thing into whose possibility or real
existence we have clear insight through experience. Through the actuality
of a thing, experience instructs us naturally of its possibility.
Reason, however, can derive from these examples of experience certain
laws of the possibility of this or that thing[;] the first" prindpia data and
Reading "ersten" for "ersteren," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiü).
69
materialia* of possibility, however, must necessarily be given from experience and must arise out of it.
We must not take something to be impossible, however, because we
cannot think it or represent it through the senses: e.g., one who was born
blind cannot, through reason, provide himself with any representation of
colors, because experience has deprived him of the data for this[;] nonetheless, he cannot and may not infer their impossibility. If we accept that,
then all philosophy is abolished.
There are logical truths. They are those that relate merely to the understanding and reason.
From another side, we can think of an aesthetic and a practical truth. The
former relates namely to the condition' of taste, the latter on the contrary
to the rules of the free will.
Logical truth, however, is not always aesthetically true, and it does not
always bring with it practical perfection.
Every truth is always, in itself, a logical perfection, or a perfect cognition, according to the rules of the understanding and of reason.
Much can be aesthetically true without being logically true[;] it may
only stimulate and please. Thus it is, e.g., with novels.
Even practical truth need not always be grounded on the understanding
and on reason either. E.g., if I slander someone to someone else, I can in
this way arouse his affects, and in this way his will, although this slander is
not logically true.
Logical truth is distinguished from aesthetical truth in the fact that
when something delights and excites me, I can neglect something concerning its truth. Thus logical truth can frequently give way to aesthetic truth.
92 Frequently the truth does not please us most of all, but rather even lies
do. We are happier with fables than with logical truths. He who takes
nature as his basis in painting, e.g., is not always in accord with delight
and stimulation and pleasure. Fiction frequently excites us more.
Our wishes often belong toßctiones. They often tend toward something
better than nature actually offers. Thus, e.g., we are pleased by enthusiasm in friendship, are stirred by the earthy shepherd's life. It is true, of
course, that even in aesthetic truth there must always be a certain logical
truth, but the more we look to the aesthetically true, the less logical truth
there can be in the subject that we want to represent. Thus, e.g., it is
aesdietically true that man will not rise again when he is dead. Although
this runs direcdy contrary to the logical (and to say nothing of the practical) truth.
What all men say is true according to the rules of taste, and thus it is
aesthetically true. For a universal consensus is sufficient for this. How-
' principles that are given [and]material.
' "Verhaltniß."
70
ever, what is true according to the rules of taste is quite frequently false
according to the rules of reason.
Men often think of what they hope or at least wish for as possible, and
actual, because they would like to have it.
All fables contain an aesthetic truth, but seldom a logical truth. E.g.,
animals talking. Here there must of course really be something true; but
aesthetic truth takes precedence over the logically true. In it one represents something possible. It does not involve any absurdity, either, that
animals should be able to talk.
Under a certain hypothesis^, which can be made up, a certain degree of
logical truth can prevail even in a fable.
But no learned man has yet been able to determine exactly the degree
of truth that has to obtain in this case, and the greatest aestheticians have
not yet succeeded in indicating this. Objective marks will often not be
sufficient for us. Here one can only rely on the agreement of our cognitions either among themselves or with the cognitions of others[;] thus it
happens, e.g., in calculation.
We always test a proposition on the reason of others, or on our own 93
[reason] at various times and occasions, and in various situations of our
reason. But very often we also rely on illusion, i.e., on the way it first
appears to us. We only want to attain the approval of others.
We gladly publicize our judgments when thereby we derive merit, or
believe that we can attain it.
The human understanding, since it has a natural law to extend its
cognitions just as much as possible, must not be forbidden the means by
which alone it can distinguish the true from the false, and by which it can
not just enrich but also correct its cognitions.
Thus one must not set up any obstacles to making judgments public,
that is, to putting them forth, for the insight of all. That is, indeed, the
universal right of every man, and the only certain way of attaining truth.
Even mathematics derives propositions, and the triumphant, invincible
certainty of its apodeictic proofs and convictions, not from objective criteria of truth, but rather from subjective ones, because in this science there
is something that agrees with everyone's reason.
Where, however, cognitions rise up but are soon thrown even further
down, there the suspicion is very great that the universal approval that
accompanied them in the beginning and once, was grounded only on the
particular minds, and hence cannot be enduring.
§ ioo
A cognition is either wholly true, or either partly true or partly false.
A cognition can never be utterly false, however, although it can frequently be wholly true.
71
Every judgment arises out of the understanding, therefore it must to
some extent agree with the laws of the understanding and of reason.
It is therefore impossible that a man should make a completely false
judgment, and even accept it as completely true.
For otherwise the judgment would have to contradict the laws of the
understanding.
94 Thus a cognition that is presented as thoroughly false will nevertheless
always be only in part false and will always contain a certain degree of
truth. Indeed, even in the judgments of a madman (however peculiar this
remark may seem), on closer investigation there will always be at least a
partial truth that can be found.
If we were to suppose that some judgments could be utterly false, it
would have to be possible for the understanding to deviate from all laws,
and in this way[,] under dais supposition^] all the prestige of our doctrine
of reason would fall and disappear[;] on the contrary, we would be able to
trust it very little.
If someone else were able to judge completely falsely, then in just the
same way it would be as possible for us as for him. In all use of our
understanding and our reason, then, we would never be anything but
quite uncertain.
Thus when we believe we have found falsehood in someone else's
judgment, we must be convinced by this very means that some partial
truth or other must prevail therein, however hidden it is.
In this principle, however, much fairness actually prevails. Such a way
of thinking is moral and sympathetic," so that one does not deny all truth
whatsoever to others in their cognitions.
But as1' exclusive self-love allows only its own welfare to be promoted,
without in the least caring for or contributing anything to the well-being of
others, so too is exclusive judgment,1" where one ascribes to oneself alone
the possession of all true cognitions, and on the other hand denies them
completely to all others and attributes to them only false ones[;] nothing
but a ruinous conceit, since one esteems only himself alone and despises
all those around him.
Such minds, infatuated with this self-conceit, think themselves in their
own understanding a Goshen,21 and that everything else is veiled in Egyptian darkness.
Many judgments and concepts are true in regard to their essential
features, but false in regard to their accidental features.
We can frequently judge falsely in theory. Regardless of this, however,
our judgments in praxis^ can nevertheless be true.
"theilnehmend."
Reading "So wie aber" for "So aber," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"das Ausschließende Unheil."
72
Even in natural theology there can actually be many erroneous ideas 95
and speculations, which are still true in praxis^. E.g., with the omnipresence of God, one can represent and think this as nothing, or as an
extension through the whole of space.
This latter concept is false, of course, but regardless ofthat, it is true in
regard topraxisL. God may be omnipresent in whatever way he will, in any
case, he really is so[;] and we must therefore fear his omnipresence, let it
consist in what it may.
When a speculation is actually erroneous, but this error does not on
that account have any influence onpraxisL, i.e., on the morality of morals,*
then it is indifferent in regard to morals and not as detestable as if it also
ruined morals.
Thus when our judgments are in conflict with the judgments of others, in order to be able to compare these judgments with and against one
another we must observe the following rules: A cognition-' of truth is
when our judgments agree with the judgments of others who can have
science concerning it[,] or what is all the same, when they are universally
valid.
When, therefore, there is something to be found in my judgment thus
contrary to the judgments of others, then in respect of the truth of my
judgment I am not very certain, and I must first of all be occupied with
searching for an agreement of my judgment with the judgment of others,
one that is posited and also hidden and far-removed, and at least in most
cases this agreement will actually be very easy to find. For in our nonagreeing2 judgments there is really more agreement present than we suppose.
Only it is necessary that we understand the judgment of others and not
misinterpret it.
There is also no systema of universal truths of reason that is completely
and utterly true except for mathematics, just as no cognition can be
completely false.
A cognition can be true partialiter, in that it is wholly true but does not
concern the whole object but only a part of it. Nonetheless such cognitions are always certain.
Thus he who confidently gives the approval of truth to someone else's 96
complete philosophical systema, all at once and without thinking much
about it, concerning him we can alwayscorrectly infer that he does not yet
understand it and is not in a position to distinguish correctly the true from
the false. For it is certain: no systema can be wholly true, there is always a
falsehood posited in it, even if it does not concern what is essential in the
"die Moralität der Sitter "
y "Kenntniß."
Reading "nicht übereinstimmenden" for "übereinstimmenden."
73
system. With philosophical truths, errors and mistakes are always so
mixed together with the truth that one always finds something there to
improve.
§ IO2
A cognition that contains enough truth as is required just for the attainment of the principal end is exact[;] but it is rough, on the other hand,
when one cannot attain the principal end with it. (Exactness is a cognition,
but it cannot suitably be opposed to roughness, but rather the roughness
of cognition must be opposed to its unity.)
Precision, meticulousness, is when I do not point out anything more
that is true in a cognition than is necessary for insight into it. The transgression of this rule is a great error. That in a cognition for which only a
little attention is required is called rough[;] that for whose clarity greater
attention is required is called subtle.
Very often it is necessary to be subtle. Because from the neglect of
subtlety such great confusions arise. Although subtlety is often blamed,
since it requires far too much attention.
In regard to practical cognitions, one can appeal to and rely on the
healthy understanding.
A rule for testing oneself and one's science concerning any cognition is
this: if I understand and have insight into a thing perfectly, then I must be
able to communicate and represent it so clearly to another man that he
will have insight into it just as perfectly as I, if only he has a healthy
understanding. If I cannot do this, however, it is a certain sign that I do
not yet understand it rightly myself.
97 Every cognition is subject to partial untruth. But this untruth concerns
merely the more or less exact. And nevertheless it can always be exact
enough to attain its purpose. E.g., if I measure a mountain, I will never be
able to measure so exactly and infallibly that I might not err in the least,
even if it were only a very few inches[;] regardless of that, however, the
quantity that emerges by means of my survey is sufficient and exact
enough to determine the complete height of the mountain. Many of our
judgments of reason are made merely by visual estimate and of course
they can therefore, in accordance with more refined reason and learnedness, not be exact enough[;] but regardless of that, they are exact enough
for their purpose.
The highest and most tiresome exactitude, which may be reached only
with much accuracy and learnedness, but is of no use in regard to its
principal end, is called pedantry. In mathematics it is quite otherwise.
Here there must always be exactitude. Nothing must be left out.
74
§ 103
If a cognition, considered historically, is correct, it can nonetheless be
incorrect, considered formaliter. E.g., the soul is immortal[;] this proposition is true materialiter and correct. When one represents this, however,
the form can often be completely false.
A cognition is true materialiter, however, when we have a material
science of it. [It is] trueformaliter, however, when the grounds for proving
and deriving it are correct.
Much that is undoubtedly certain in regard to praxisL is false in regard
to reason. E.g., a part is smaller than the whole, or, the world must have a
beginning.
Thus a cognition can be true materialiter and false formaliter, but not
conversely[;] then it is a formal error[.] This occurs more frequently in
philosophy than is believed.
Thus there is no material, but rather a formal error in those qualitates
occultae which are given as a ground for the cause of a thing, and which
answer" the given question with the question itself.
All definitions that explain idem per idem are formally erroneous. 98
These formal errors [are ones] where one grants the philosopher the
proof in a cognition, since one is already prepossessed in favor of the
cognition antidpando and holds the proof to be dispensable.
Where my healthy understanding precedes the cognition of the truth I
am not in the least fussy about investigating the acuteness* of the proof,
and I need not be so. This acuteness that one metes out to certain
propositions often comes from the fact that they have to be regarded not
only as very true but also as very necessary.
Thus it is with the two articles of faith of natural religion
1. There is a God.
2. There is another world.
Those who want to investigate such shallow proofs of necessary propositions of this sort and to make a few fine distinctiones immediately acquire a
bad reputation, because it is believed that they could well be enemies of
the propositions themselves.
These are the piae fraudes,' which are so suited, so peculiar, to man.
One thinks and believes he has a right to this when one believes that he
does not deceive someone if he communicates to him something good by
means of all kinds of pretense, dissimulation, etc.[;] indeed, one often
Reading "und die gegebene Frage . . . beantworten" for "und die gegegebe Frage
beantwortet."
"Schärfe."
' pious deceptions.
75
seeks credit, without looking to the moral in this deception - which deception always remains - to see if it is in itself reprehensible; the recommendation of virtue must be virtuous. -
Many things are often cognized as true without any marks. Such truths,
irrefutable in themselves, are called improvable, i.e., because one cannot
doubt them. Besides, it is not necessary to prove them in particular.
A cognition whose consequences are all true is true, too. But if just or ;
consequence is false, then the cognition is false, too.
From a false cognition nothing true can arise. For a false cognition is
the true nothing. But the consequences of a cognition that is partly true,
partly false, can be true.
In the investigation of a cognition one will thus need to look not so
much to its true as to its false consequences.
99 It is admittedly true in general that so-called apagogical proofs, or the
demonstrationes ad absurdum contrarium,d where in order to establish and
support his opinion, one makes it clear and shows how ridiculous and
completely absurd it would be if one were to suppose its opposite [- it is
true] that these proofs are very easy, but diey do not give me enough light
in regard to the sources of a cognition.
The connection of cognitions with their grounds is thus the surest and
best mark of the truth of a cognition.
§ 104
Historical cognitions are distinguished from rational ones according to the
form of reason in the cognition.
A cognition is historical if it does not agree with the form of reason,
rational if it does agree with it, and in fact without regard to the object. But
here we also have to reflect on the object if we want to establish the
distinction between dogmatic and historical cognition.
ist Dogmatic cognition is one that is universal and that arises a priori from
reason.
2nd Historical cognition, however, is not always universal, and it rests on the
assertions of things that have happened, on the assertion of others[;] thus it
arises a posteriori.
All of morals is dogmatic[;] one does not teach, blame, and point out
there what is commonly detested by men, but rather what ought to be
blamed.
But physica is not dogmatic. One of its parts would be pure physics,
where from universal rules and concepts of bodies we derive their properties.
d demonstrations to the absurdity of the contrary.
76
The weight of bodies pertains to experience, however, and is a historical cognition a posteriori.
All dogmata should rightly be grounded first on reason, but they can
frequently be historical, too.
The objects of dogmata are not individual things but rather universal
properties and characters of things. The objects of history are individual
things, however.
But although dogmata have universal properties as their object, they can 100
often still be cognized historically, although they are rational by their
nature.
All dogmata are by their nature objective^ rational, though they can be
subjective^ historical.
Now we must also speak of systems. The author restricts the meaning
of this word far too much by applying it merely and solely to dogmatic
truth.
A better definition of a system will thus be the following:
A system is a multitude or manifold of many simple cognitions and truths
combined together, such that taken together these constitute a whole.Every
system must thus bring with it a unity, but this unity can have as its ground
either coordination, as with historical cognitions, or subordination.
A systema is, however,
A. historical
B. rational.
The form of a system will in most cases be regarded as arbitrary.
The understanding varies among men[;] he who likes to deal with the
parts is subtle. He who deals with the whole is the great man.
A legitimate system must be built by a single individual. It cannot
possibly be a patchwork, to which one adds this, another that.
This capacity to form a system is so advantageous because it is so rare
and has at the same time so great a value.
One must always have a kind of systema, for each of our cognitions must
have a logical place.
The first systemata, naturally, are astonishingly defective. Gradually
they become larger and more complete.
§ 106
We have already established the distinction between logical and aesthetic
truths above.
Much can be logically true without on that account containing an aesthetic truth, and much can be aesthetically true, on the other hand, without on that account containing logical truth.
77
101 This includes allfiaiones.
This includes all aesthetic truths, which are true according to the rules
of taste.
In these cognitions there prevails a kind of fashion, actually. This includes, e.g., proverbs, which actually are subject to a kind of fashion;
although they actually are not always propositions such as are in accordance with taste.
All that is in conformitywith the rules of taste and agrees with the rules
of appearance is aesthetically true.
Poets, who merely want to write aesthetically truly, are not tested on the
balance of logic[;] one does them a great wrong thereby. They are writers,
not moralists and logicians, and they retain always their worth.
To be aesthetically true, there can frequently be a certain degree of
untruth. Which nonetheless must not be completely opposed to the truth.
E.g., if a philosopher were to call out: My dear friends, there are no
friends[;] this is aesthetically true and a good thought, because good
friends are very rare, and a complete agreement of minds is very rare.
§ 109
Now we come to a very important doctrine for all of logic, namely, the
doctrine of the origin of error. Does error arise from the lack of reason?
Answer: No. From the lack of reason nothing arises but ignorance. But
ignorance is quite distinct from error.
He who knows little can still judge completely correctly about this little.
The second question is:
Does error not arise also from the lack of reason combined with the
desire to judge?
Answer: He who knows certainly that he is ignorant will not presume to
judge about something that he does not understand.
But assuming that he did not feel himself unable, and that he thought
102 he knew much and thus wanted to judge about much, then nothing more
would arise from this, his efforts to judge would be in vain.
But how can it happen that the understanding seems to have insight
only with difficulty? That the understanding in judging deviates from its
laws?
No power can of itself conflict with its own laws. E.g., if a body is left to
its weight, then according to the laws of gravity it falls downward, and one
is actually in a position to figure out the velocity of its fall.
With our judgments through the understanding, then, if there were no
power active, if no power interfered, we would actually never err, but
would only be frequently ignorant.
Thus no error arises from the understanding properly, but rather there
must be another power active in the understanding at the same time if an
78
error is to arise. The powers of nature deviate from their laws only when
foreign laws mingle with the given laws.
Thus if we had nothing but understanding, we would judge only little,
to be sure, but we would judge all of this little truly.
If we had a wholly pure will, furthermore, then granted, we would do
only a little good, but we would never be able to sin.
Deviation from the rules of the pure will constitutes the morally evil,
and this arises only when and because other effects of other powers
mingle with the otherwise pure laws of the will. E.g.: The inclinations and
affects. Just in this way, when foreign powers mingle with the correct laws
of the understanding, a mixed effect arises, and error arises from the
conflict of [this with] our judgments based on the laws of the understanding and of reason.
Every error is a phaenomenon, a puzzle in regard to the concept of its
own possibility.
It is, as it were, a wholly unusual, unnatural appearance, which contradicts the laws of nature.
What is contrary to the laws of nature is not an object of investigation
for us, but that which occurs seldom and is contrary to the laws of nature
is an object of investigation.
Error does occur frequently, to be sure, but it conflicts with the laws of
the understanding and of reason, and thus it is worthy of being an object
of our investigation.
Error proceeds merely from the understanding and from reason, be- 103
cause foreign powers interfere, but never from the senses or from imagination.
Since our understanding and reason judge objective^, there are other
subjective grounds of our judgment, which, however, do not agree with
the understanding and reason.
All error arises when we hold subjective grounds of our judgment to be
objective ones.
The whole business about ghosts is grounded, not on the judgment of
the understanding, but in the imagination, which, in the observation of an
object, joins to it other similar objects, although they do not exist.
The understanding combines concepts with a thing in conformity with
its laws and in conformity with the thing, the object, itself.
The imagination, however, brings in other images, which relate not to
the object but to the subject.
From this mingling of the imagination with the understanding arise
effects that do not agree perfectly with the rules of the understanding and
of reason.
Many errors arise from custom, others merely because a change has
occurred in the subject. E.g., when we make a mark on the wall.
Many errors arise because one constantly renews in one's mind the
79
images one once had, and therefore regards everything similar as the
thing itself. E.g., when a young man is treated sharply by his teacher, so
that he hates him, and when he later sees a man who resembles him, he is
often inclined to hate him, too, merely on account of the similaritywith his
disciplinarian.
One can often reject something through the understanding and accept
it again through the effect of another power. All of this arises merely from
the mingling of powers, which, if they are not contrary to one another, are
nevertheless of different kinds.
We cognize the quantity of things only by judgingin respect of distance,
e.g., the difference between a fly and an elephant.
We readily notice a fly nearby, but we notice an elephant in the distance,
too, and thus we just infer that the latter must be larger than the former.
104 The imagination can alter these judgments very much, however, and
can bring about in our soul other impressions, other representations of the
thing than we should produce of it if we [were to] have insight into its true
properties.
Therefore if we remove from man his imagination, his sensible wit, the
judgment of the understanding will always be true.
The understanding mingled with powers of another sort errs, and this
error we must comprehend again through the understanding. From this it
becomes clear that we have to comprehend and cognize errors through
the very power whose errors we want to note.
No error can arise from the understanding or from reason alone, for no
power can act against its own laws.
§ no
That ignorance in itself cannot in the least be an origin of error has
already been shown in the previous paragraph in several ways.
§ in
Error is either avoidable or unavoidable.
If we do not judge at all, we can of course avoid all errors. He who does
not judge does not err. An error through ignorance can also be prevented.
This ignorance consists, however, not in the ignorance of lack, but rather
in the ignorance of intention/ and this latter is really a kind of wise
ignorance. Many speculationes are nothing but a pathway to the greatest
errors. Many errors can be avoided, however, if we have the intention not
to settle anything, to decide anything. Many things are such that they
' "desVorsatzes."
80
cannot possibly remain undecided, however. E.g., when a judge is supposed to settle disputes, given that he also errs on these points and in
these cases, then error is unavoidable in respect to him.
One can opine something, and with grounds, without erring, but when
one states this same mere opinion and defective supposition as a certain
truth, then one frequently errs.
The inclination to decide is thus the most certain path to error and is a 105
certain dogmatic pride (customary in some so-called philosophers)[;] but
if one does not trust the marks of truth that one has cognized thus far, and
thus does not pass judgment but often reserves it instead, then one actually avoids many errors.
§ "3
A cognition is
1. obviously or
2. covertly false.
This division of false cognition is relative
We have a kind of average understanding, which is derived from the
understanding of all men, and is, as it were, a measuring stick, i.e., an
ideal.
Now if we take an error that can subsist with this average degree of
understanding, then the error is still bearable. But if it cannot exist with it,
then it is not to be endured, and it is an absurdity.
Absurdity presupposes, namely, not only a false cognition, but also that
the common understanding (le sens commuri) can see this as false.
Any covert false cognition can be made obviously false, and then the
cognition is reduced ad absurdum, so that he who previously had this
cognition, though he is not absurd, would be manifestly absurd and would
act contrary to all reason if he were to hold it to be true after all the
grounds that have been laid before him for the falsehood of his cognition.
It is foolish, then, when learned men call each other absurd and yet
thereafter want to dispute with one another as to whether what they wrote
is true or false. For by calling each other absurd, one thus denies to the
other all true cognition whatsoever[;] and if I suppose that someone does
not possess and is unable to possess any cognition at all, then how can he
see my grounds for the falsehood of his cognition, or pride himself on a
true cognition and believe himself to possess it? But then how am I in a 106
position to dispute?
In the 114th paragraph the author treats of the necessary and of the
contingent, and of contingent truths, concerning which we have nothing
more to note.
81
THE FIFTH SECTION
Of the clarity of learned cognition
§ "5
All grounds of cognition are either internal or external. The former are
determinations in the thing itself, by which it can be cognized without
comparison with other things. Through the latter, however, I only acquire
a cognition of a thing insofar as I compare it with other things. And these
external grounds of cognition are called marks or characteristics.
Internal cognitions cannot even appropriately be called marks or characteristics of a thing, however.
In the comparison of one thing with another we can always represent
two sorts of things, either sameness, identity, or difference, diversity. E.g.,
marks of sameness in men and animals are that they both have a perishable body. Marks of difference, however, are that the former have been
given a rational soul, while die latter have no reason at all.
In most cases one needs marks of identity, but in many, too, marks of
diversity.
All genera^ and species^, e.g., arise from marks of identity but not of
difference.
If one wants, e.g., to distinguish the metals from one another, then one
must again have notae diversitatis, e.g., that gold is heavier than all metals,
etc. For this is the foremost distinguishing mark of gold from silver,
copper, etc., and the remaining metals.
107 A mark is thus not merely a ratio disjunctions/as some have defined it,
but also a ratio identitatisf
A mark is called in general a nota.
All marks in general are either
1. internal
2. external.
Sunt vel externae, vel internae omnes notae.h
1. The marks that I cognize of a thing are internal if I consider the thing alone
merely in itself[.]
2. The marks that I have of a thing are external if I compare the thing with other
things, and such marks are called characteres¥, distinguishing marks, characteristics in the proper sense.
ground of difference.
ground of identity.
All marks are either external or internal.
82
The use of all marks will thus naturally be able to be likewise
1. internal
2. external.
If I cognize the internal marks, which taken together constitute the
complete concept, then these marks are complete, and sufficient, all that
there is to cognize in a thing, what can be cognized in it absolute^.
The absolute cognitions' of things are far harder than the cognitions
that one acquires through comparisons. For these latter are far easier and
for us more natural, because it lies, as it were, in our nature that in the
comparison of things with others we far more easily become aware of, and
are able to observe, the agreement or difference in objects. Thus, e.g.,
ugliness, en comparaison with beauty, and with true beauty, strikes the eyes
when it occurs among many ugly persons[;] and when he sets out to pass
judgment on himself, man himself in most cases asks, not how good he is
and how much he still lacks, but rather whether he is not as good as, or
even better than, others. Thus it happens that Herr von Wolff, and even
our authorf,] take marks and characteristics to be one and the same.
In the beginning, in most cases, most things are held to be only very
slightly different, if not wholly of the same sort[;] but with time, then,
differences are gradually discovered, and after one attends to the things 108
more and more, more and more of their marks are found. But this gradual
searching out of the marks of a thing involves as much fineness of the
understanding as being able to find a certain similarity, a oneness, and
agreement, among things where there appear to be, or even actually are,
the greatest differences.
§116
In this § the author speaks of mediate and immediate marks. If a thing can
be cognized through a certain mark without the mediation of a mark
different from this mark, then such a mark is immediate. A mediate mark,
on the other hand, is a mark of a mark: e.g. Perishability is a mark of man.
But an immediate one, for perishability is a mark of a mortal being, i.e., of a
body[;] man is mortal, however, and has a body.
There are degrees, then, of remote marks, and thus there are degrees
of mediate marks. The first degree is when a thing can be cognized only
through a nota intermedia. But among all marks, one of which is the mark
of the other, a relation of subordination is always to be found. But there is
also a relation of coordination, and this occurs among immediate marks,
where every particular mark is a new ground of cognition of the thing.
"Kenntnißen."
83
Through experience we can become aware of nothing but marks that
are coordinated, i.e., placed next to one another. Reason, however, is only
in a position to provide' subordinate marks of a thing, i.e., to portray for us
series of marks.
In the subordination of marks I have no more than a single immediate
mark, and the remaining notae are marks of marks. But in the coordinatio
notarumk all marks are immediate.
In the series of subordinate marks, i.e., of marks ordered beneath one
another, there is always a.ßrst[,] i.e, the concepts are restricted.
In coordination, however, there is no restriction.
109 There are uncountably many marks that belong to a thing immediately,
and our understanding is not in a position to have insight into all properties and to determine them exactly.
In subordination, the immediate mark is called nota inßma, and the
last mark of all marks is called nota summa.
Through the subordination of marks I attain a deep, i.e., intensive
quantity. But through the coordination of marks[,] ofnotae[,] one achieves
an extensive quantity[;] i.e., cognition that is worked out according to the
ground and is extensive.
The series of marks that are coordinated with one another is, as it were,
a line without limits, which is infinite; for it is always possible[;] indeed, it
is to be assumed that posterity, with time, will be able to discover more
and more immediate marks of a thing.
The series of marks that are subordinated to one another is limited,
however, and has its restrictions, and often, in fact, quite soon, when no
further mark of a mark can be stated therein.
Metaphysica is that science by means of which we search for the terminus
a priori of subordinate marks. Through it we attain simple, irreducible
concepts.
Too much beauty is also harmful and actually arouses suspicion. Beautiful simplicity occurs frequently by nature. The greatest art consists, however, in hiding the art that has been applied somewhere, so that it is not at
all noticeable, but instead seems to be mere nature.
Profundity is in a certain way contrary to beautyf;] cognition becomes
dry, the more that is abstracted in it. I cannot have full insight into mere
abstract cognitions in general unless I can portray and have insight into a
case in concrete. The dry often degenerates into the comical,'however, and
this often involves art: thus, e.g., in the case of remarks'" made in society,
and this is usually called simplicity.
In all description one seeks more to understand the thing than to have
; "suppeditiren."
* coordination of marks.
' "ins Poßierliche."
m "Einfalle."
84
insight into it. In all explanation, however, one seeks again on the contrary
more to have insight into the thing than to understand it.
Experience increases the multitude of marks coordinated with one another.
The extensive quantity of a cognition is, as it were, its volume, while its no
intensive quantity is its density. In certain cases the extensive quantity of
cognition is more valuable, but in others the intensive. In morals, e.g., the
intensive quantity of a cognition is more necessary, but in physics and
medicine the extensive quantity of cognition is quite frequently more
indispensable.
Dry cognitions are not at all adequate for sensibility and hence not for
beauty, either. Thorough, deep, solid cognitions can and must be dry,
however, without complaint. One replaces this dryness when one considers the abstract in concrete in a certain case. (Analysis proceeds ascendendo, but synthesis proceeds descendendo.)
§ "V
Through negative marks of a thing I think of something that is not actually
to be found in the thing. Through affirmative marks, however, I think of
what is in fact present in the thing. Negative marks, however, are possible
only through the fact that one previously thinks of the marks opposed to
them, thus affirming. Thus, e.g., I cannot know what darkness is unless I
previously have a clear idea^ of light.
Negative marks only serve to avoid errors, however. E.g., animals do
not have rational souls. But affirmative marks serve to attain an extensive,
undeveloped cognition of a thing. E.g., God is omniscient, etc. Gold loses
nothing of its massa and weight in fire, is ductile.
Besides ignorance, there is another, still more dangerous evil for the
understanding, and this is error. Through affirmative marks we avoid
ignorance, but through negative marks we avoid error. These are the ends
for the two sorts of marks. Through negative marks one acquires no new
cognition, of course. They are still very necessary, nonetheless, and important, for through them one guards against erroneous cognitions.
The fewer the means we have available for attaining true cognitions,
the more we need to have negative marks, in order not to err in cognition of the thing. Thus, e.g., in no science is there a greater multitude of in
negative marks than in the rational doctrine of God," in natural theologia. For in this we do not have available any means at all for attaining
extensive cognitions. Thus every second we are inclined, e.g., to err in
the concept, idea, and representation of the divine being and in general
of God himself, because we would like to compare Him sensibly with
" "in der vernünftigen Gottes-Gelahrtheit."
85
the things of which we become aware on earth, but these cannot be a
measuring-stick for God. God cannot be cognized'by us through the
senses, and consequently the whole of our cognition of him can only be
very restricted.
If, therefore, we consider God in theologia naturalis, and remove all
negative marks through which we speak of him, then nothing further
remains for us but the idea of the most all-sufficient, most all-perfect
being.
Negative judgments are actually frequently foolish, because what is
denied is often already impossible in itself. E.g.: man has reason, therefore he is not a stone. It is true, diis is a settled truth, which no one will
doubt. But because it is also obvious that no one will venture in earnest to
hold a man to be a stone, this judgment is idle.
§ 118
Every mark is a ground of cognition, which is appraised through its
consequences. Accordingly as the consequences are of worth, with respect to reason or to our perfection and happiness, the marks will also be
of worth as grounds of cognition.
The logical worth of the marks is to be derived from the former consequences, their practical worth from the latter ones.
If many consequences can be derived from one ground, then it is
fruitful, or it has extensive quantity[;] e.g., from the sun flow many consequences in respect of the earth. Thus the rules of morals are very fruitful
in that they have an influence on our life, i.e., on our conduct," that isvery
great.
A mark is great extensive^ if I can cognize many consequences of a thing,
112 but a mark is great intensive^ when I can cognize not so much many
consequences of a thing as great and important ones. The former mark is
called fruitful, but the latter correct.
Empty speculations have a logical worth. They often have many consequences in respect of reason, although they admittedly have no influence
on the happiness of man[;] e.g., that the moon is inhabited, etc. This
proposition has no influence on the will, on the state, etc. No one becomes more perfect, happier, or better through this cognition, in respect
of his external understanding, although he becomes somewhat more perfect in respect of his reason.
Other cognitions are aesthetically correct because they excite our taste
and pleasure, e.g., poetry delights, because it is in conformity with our
"Wandel."
86
taste. All the importance of cognition exists only when it is considered by
itself alone, without comparison with other cognitions.
§ "9
Marks either suffice for our ends, and then they are comparative sufficientes.p Or [they suffice] for distinguishing a thing from all others, hence
for all logical ends, and then they are notae absolute sufficientes.q
All experiences have only a relative sufficientia. E.g., if I consider closely
a pear tree, then I can easily distinguish its leaves from the leaves of all
other trees in the forest. This cognition is thus sufficient in relation to
other cognitions.
The sufficientia relativa or comparativa suffices to distinguish a thing
from things that we are familiar with up until now, but not from all things
that are possible, that might exist sometime. E.g., gold differs from all
other metals through its weight, but a metal has also been discovered,
named platina, that is white in color but has the same weight as gold.
Consequently this mark, this distinguishing ground of gold from all remaining metals, is not sufficient enough.
Things that strike our senses can only be cognized and distinguished
through marks that are relatively sufficient, but not by means of such 113
marks as suffice absolutely.
The sufficienta notarum,' however, is:
1. externa
2. interna.
The former consists in the fact that the marks of a thing are sufficient to
distinguish it from other things through comparison. But the latter consists in the fact that a mark of a thing suffices for the derivation from it of
all its remaining determinations. From this sufficienta arises the division of
grounds of cognition into
A. internal and
B. external.
In the case of the latter, one cannot derive anything from them, e.g.,
gold has a yellow color, man is an animal that laughs. The former are
fruitful, however, so that much flows from them.
External grounds of cognition can frequently be quite important in
themselves, but in respect of their inner sufficiency can be unfruitful and
useless.
sufficient comparatively.
marks that are sufficient absolutely.
sufficiency of marks.
87
§ 120
Necessary marks are such as are ad essentiampertinentia,' without which the
thing cannot be thought at all. Pertinent autem ad essentiam
i. vel solum ut causae
aut 2. ut causata'
Omnia autem ad essentiam pertinentia A. essentialia, e.g., extension[.]
B. attributa." E.g., the divisibility of bodies.
Contingent marks are extra essentialia, however, marks without which the
thing can nonetheless be thought, e.g., learnedness in the case of a man.
If the essentialia are marks then they are not subordinate but instead are
coordinate[;] the attributa are not coordinate with the essentialia, however,
but instead are subordinate^] since they follow from one another.
§ 121
Marks extra essentialia are either
A. internal or
B. external.
114 The latter are also called relations. The internal ones, however, are
again
1. necessary
2. contingent.
The former are again
1. complete, or marks that are sufficient for the derivation of everything that is
contained in the thing or
2. incomplete. If the marks do not suffice for the derivation and cognition of
everything that belongs to the thing.
The internal contingent relations are called modiL. The modificationof
external relations does not modify man himself, although among the
things of nature an alteration of relation seems in most cases to be bound
up at the same time with an alteration of the modification.
Summer and winter are actually not changes in the sun itself but only
altered relations1' of the sun to our earth.
pertaining to the essence.
They pertain to the essence, however, (i.) either solely as causes or (2.) as things caused.
All things that pertain to the essence, however, are (A.) essential [marks] . . . [or] (B.)
attributes.
* "relationes, und Verhältniße.
88
i^ are nothing but inner determinations and alterations that can be
thought in a thing.
Relationes, however, are alterations that occur in a thing in relation to
others and in relation to other things.
Now we pose the question, whether there cannot also be precision in
the case of the completudo notarum, necessaria intema," so that no superfluous marks* are found, which are no longer necessary to distinguish the
thing from all others and to derive all the determinations belonging to it,
so that everything is omitted which is such that even if it is lacking, the
concepts will nonetheless be complete even without it.
Responsio[:] yes. It occurs frequently. The notae rei necessariae internae
sufficientesy constitute precision.
If the marks contain no less than is required for distinguishing the
thing, then this imprecision.
If, finally, the marks of a thing are completely appropriate to it, then
they are notae adequatae.
The adequate concept of a thing insofar as it cannot be derived from 115
any other is the concept of the essence[,] essentia.
The essence of a thing is the first sufficient basic concept, which
suffices for the derivation of everything that belongs to the thing.
The notae necessariae are
A. primitivaem
B. derivativae
The former constitute the essentialia, but the latter the attributa. E.g.,
in the case of the triangle the 3 angles are just as necessary and indispensable as the 3 sides. But we derive the former from the latter, and they are
hence attributed but the sides themselves are basic conceptsf,] essentialia.
In order to cognize the essential in a thing, the following is necessary:
To cognize the attributa I have to cognize the internal necessary marks,
which, however, are accompanied by others. But to cognize the essentia
itself I have to see that the marks cannot be derived from any otherf;] in
order to cognize the essentia itself, I have to know that the marks and
essentialia are complete, and taken together are sufficient for cognition of
the whole.
The coordination of marks that is complete constitutes completudo.
The basic concept of everything that is necessary to a thing is its
essence. To investigate the essence of things is the business and the end of
philosophy.
The marks which, taken together, constitute the essence of a thing are
completeness of marks that are internal and necessary.
Reading "keine überflüßigen Merckmahle" for "überflüßige Merckmahle."
' marks ofthething that arenecessary, internal, and sufficient.
89
the essentialia. The consequences from the essence, the rationata sive
consectaria,z these are the attributa. Modi are notae internae, quarum
possibilitas tantum per essentiam determinatur."
The modi are thus not rationata essentiaeb in regard to their truth, but
only in regard to their possibility. Modi are thus nothing but contingent
marks.
Modi as well as relationes do not belong to the essence at all, ad essentiam
non pertinent,either as constitutiva or as attributa.
All the marks of a thing belong either to the essence of a thing, essentialia^ or they are not essentialia: Ad essentiam pertinentia sunt vel essen-
116 tialia, vel attributa. Extraessentialia autem sunt vel notae, sive notae intemae,
vel relationes, sive notae externae, quarum possibilitas tantum per essentiam
determinatur.c
Essence is divided into
1. the logical
2. the real essence.
The complete basic concept of a thing is in general its essence.
The first ground of everything that I think in the concept of the thing,
however, is the logical essence. The first basic concept of everything that
really and in fact belongs to the thing, however, is the real essence.
From this it naturallybecomes clear that the logical and the real essence
must necessarily be quite distinct from one another.
When I utter words and combine a certain concept with them, then that
which I think of* in connection with this word and expression is the logical
essence. E.g., if I utter the word matter, then everything that is inseparable
from the concept that I combine with the expression matter is the logical
essence of matter. One can always represent and think the logical essence
by itself. Thus, e.g., with matter, I always think of an extension, an impenetrability, a certain constant inertia, and lifelessness, so that it is not in a
position to alter its position or to move by itself but only through the
assistance of another, foreign power.
These all are the essentialia of the word matter, and consequently taken
together they constitute the logical essence of it.
The subjective basic concept is what is contained in an internal concept
of the thing. But this does not yet prove that still more marks cannot exist
* things grounded, or consequences.
* internal marks whose possibility is determined only by the essence.
* things grounded in the essence.
' Things that pertain to the essence are either essential things or attributes. Extraessential things, however, are either marks (or internal marks) or relations (or external
marks) whose possibility is determined solely by the essence.
' Ak, "hier dencke"; MS,"mir dencke" (KI, Ixviii).
90
in the object.' Instead I combine with the thing only what I represent.
Thus, e.g. in the case of the word matter, several other properties can still
occur.
The logical essence is the subjective basic concept. This concept holds
only for me, however, and not for others. Someone else can represent
more or fewer marks with the thing.
The essence of our concept is not always the essence of the thing itself,
indeed, it seldom is.
The logical essence is far smaller than the real essence. The logical
essence is a concentrated basic concept of a thing. It only comprehends
what we represent in the thing.
This joining, combining, of concepts is really very suited to the human 117
understanding, and quite necessary. It has to proceed economically with
its powers; such a compendium^ is just as good as an extended concept of
the thing, however.
The real essence comprehends everything that can ever actually belong
to a thing. This eduction is the only means for making our concepts really
distinct.
Distinctness is one of the most essential logical perfections, however.
Through it my cognition becomes far more suitable for use, but through
the real essence my cognition becomes far more extended.
The logical essence must not be mixed up with the real essence, however. For in my concept that I have of the thing I do not yet think of
everything that lies in the thing and belongs to it, or that can lie in it or
belong to it. E.g., if we take the concept of matter, modern philosophi have
discovered that in the essence of matter lies also the power of attraction; I
would certainly never have thought of this property immediately with the
word matter, and there can perhaps be other marks belonging to matter
which are not yet discovered and which only a philosopher will cognize.
From this it becomes clear that infinitely more is contained in the real
essence than in the logical essence.
We cannot actually cognize the real or objective essence of a single
object of experience or of the senses. At the most it is possible for us
properly to have insight into its logical or subjective essence.
What we think in connection with the word for a thing is very small, and
scant, indeed, often only very little[;] but everything that really belongs to
a thing revera^is frequently immeasurableand cannot be determined at all.
To search for the real essence of empirical concepts and objects is thus
a completely vain effort[;] one can, however, represent the logical essence
of concepts of reason, and clarify it suitably.
Our empirical concepts are very changeable, because our experience is
Reading "nicht daseyn können" for "daseyn können."
1 actually, intruth.
91
extended more and more each day. The logical essence is therefore also
very alterable and changeable, because with time we think more and more
118 determinations in the concept of a thing. All moral concepts are pure
concepts of the understanding, however.
There are, namely, such pure concepts of the understanding^] which
have their origin not from experience but merely from pure reason. He
who wants to find the real essence must be acquainted with all the marks
that belong to the thing constantly. Then he must search further for the
ground of these, and must endeavor to investigate them, and this is the
real essence, then. E.g., a body diat grows through internal development
belongs to the logical essence of a plant. The basic concept of its constant
determination is the real essence, however, to which it can also belong that
plants beget their like.
The concept that water is a fluid element, without odor or taste, 14
times lighter than quicksilver, etc., is the logical essence of water[;] for if I
have mastered physical cognitions about something, then I think of all this
as soon as I mention the word water. From diis, of course, I cannot at all
derive all the remaining properties which are determined for water, and
which belong to it or can belong to it, and perhaps are not yet all discovered, although we do not always think them in this connection[;] consequently it is not the real essence.
We can never state the real essence of individual things, but we can do
so for their generaL, e.g., for body in general.
Nevertheless, we are not acquainted with all concepts and [with all die]
determinations of all things that belong to them constantly; and then we
are not always in a position, eidier, immediatelyto state the true ground of
all diese determinations^] consequendy only seldom can we indicate their
real essence.
§ 124
Clear and obscure concepts are spoken of herein. The author first treated
of confused and distinct concepts in die first section of die logica, without
first thinking about clear and obscure cognition. How does it happen,
then, that he now begins to speak of diese?
Responsio[.] At the beginning of logic, die concept of clear and obscure
cognition is something that can be accepted without proof, and must dius
119 be presupposed and taken as a ground. But here one can derive it from
what was dealt with before.
Here, then, it is just die reverse.^ representation is obscure (to return to
our material), however, of which one is not conscious^ immediately. Namely,
one can become mediatelyconscious of this cognition by means of reason,
* Reading "nicht bewust" instead of "bewust," with Hinske (K.I, Ixxi).
92
and thus a way remains to make an otherwise obscure cognition clear,
distinct, and thus to make insight into it easier. E.g., if I see the MilkyWay
with the naked eye, I see nothing but a white band, but if I make use of a
tubus, then I at once become awareof the individual parts as individualstars,
and then judge at once by means of reason that these must be the stars that I
saw with the naked eye merely as a white band. I am conscious of this
representation mediately, then, but not immediately; hence in the beginning it is only obscure, but afterwards it is distinct mediate^, or clear.
§ 125
A cognition is either obscure in itself, so that it simply cannot become
clear regardless of any effort that is applied. Or it is obscure relatively, so
that it can become clear under certain circumstances, but not under
others.
The former cognition, obscure in itself, is completely impossible according to its description, however[;] for everything can become clear, however
hard it may seem to us, and what seems to us most obscure is always
obscure only relatively when we investigate it.
Logic prescribes for us the rules that we ought to apply in order to
know how we ought to proceed with cognitions of which we are conscious
that we actually possess them.
All clarity is the right way to attain distinctness. Clarity itself is not yet a
logical perfection, which distinctness, however, is. Logic presupposes clarity, then[;] it supposes* it and does not produce it itself[;] it has to do with
cognitions and representations already made clear.
Distinctness, too, is then not the proper object with which it is occupied. Distinctness, disjunctio, is of course to be distinguished from per- 120
spicuousness.' Insofar as there is clarity of marks in a cognition, to that
extent is the cognition distinct.
A cognition is brought in perspicuum, however/ only when it is so
lucid and clear that the humblest understanding has insight into it[;] on
the other hand, a cognition is imperspicua or non perspicua when it is
too great for the whole horizon of the whole human race, when it can be
called incomprehensible. Perspicuousness,k on the other hand, means nothing
but comprehensibility.
Often a cognition ceases to be comprehensible to the degree that it
ought to become really distinct. But this simply cannot be avoided, unless
we simply do not speak of the thing.
k «o «
ouppomret.
"Augenscheinlichkeit Dispicuitaet."
' Reading "aber wird eine Erkenntniß gebracht, erst" for "aber eine Erkenntniß gebracht,
geschieht erst," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"Perspicuitaet."
93
If we go back now to the distinction between clear and obscure cognition, we have further to remark that all obscure cognitions can be obscure,
however,
A. objective^
B. subjective^
but if we are to say it properly, then the former does not occur, but only
the latter.
But when the relation of a thing to the boundaries of human cognition
is such that it cannot be cognized clearly enough, but always remains
obscure, then in most cases we do not ascribe all responsibilityto him who
does not cognize the thing clearly enough, but rather to the thing itself, or
to him who expounds it. Although it frequently lies with the former rather
than with the latter. We call this cognition, into which [man] does not and
cannot have insight, obscure objective^. A cognition is obscure subjective^
when the responsibility for the thing's remaining obscure, regardless of all
the effort applied, lies not with the thing and the cognition itself but with
the one who wants to cognize something, namely, because he either possesses great ignorance, and thus naturally is not in a position to cognize
the thing, or also because he simply did not apply enough of the requisite
industry to it.
This latter obscurity, however, is really not grounded at all in the nature
of the cognition itself or even, as some hold, of all men and their understanding. For if this were to be, then the cognition simply cannot be
I2i cognized clearlyby a single man; rather, it lies simply either in the incapability and ignorance or in the negligence of this or that individual subject.
Thus it happens, then, that the same cognition that is clear to one
subject can be obscure to another, and, on the contrary, the very cognition
that is obscure to one subject can be clear to another.
Few men ever have a proper concept of what it means to have a proper,
clear concept, or cognition, of a thing.
No man can, so to speak, understand himself better[;] he judges everything he says to be fully clear to himself, and just for this reason it happens
that he is deterred from properly investigating whether he really understands himself properly or not.
Metaphysica and morals[,] these 2 pure sciences of philosophy, are of
such a kind' that in them man is never in a position to represent the
slightest concept distinctly unless he can previously attain for himself a
complete1" concept of the whole, i.e., of the whole science.
Either someone who wants to study metaphysica has a very pure, very
' "von der Art, und also beschaffen."
™ "einen Completion, und vollständigen."
94
distinct concept of it, or he knows nothing at all of it. These are the only
two ways. There is simply no mean in this.
On the other hand, someone can be quite comprehensible, especially if
he does not know anything yet, or at least knows no errors, and he who
hears him goes away exactly as clever as he came[;] this is very easy, and
such an exposition, which does not damage but also does no good[,] can
be easily comprehensible."
Thus it is not possible in some cases to combine easy comprehensibility
with complete distinctness[;] and they certainly judge wrongly who hold
the easiest exposition to be the best, and who evaluate a somewhat more
difficult, less childlike exposition, which is meant for reflection, as obscure, not understandable, even exaggerated.
It is so hard to make die obscure clear that no man has yet discovered a
universally valid means for it.
Exhaustiveness is the sufficiency of a cognition for a certain purpose.
When it serves to comply widi the purpose and to pass judgment on it, the
consequence is called the end.
With all completudo, then, we compare the cognition with a certain 122
purpose. But dais completudo is
A. externa, which appears in the comparison of the cognition with others.
B. interna which exists in itself, and lies in the cognitionitself.
Completudo comparativa, however, can often be so very useful to us
that we simply do not have need beyond that for completudo absoluta, or
intemaf,] and we can do without it. Exhaustiveness, however, rests solely
and only on the multitude of the coordinate or juxtaposed marks.
Philosophia has the purpose of instructing us how we are to learn to
understand ourselves better and better.
All new cognitions that deviate much from the usual way of judging are
wholly obscure in the beginning and are not understood by the best
mind[;] and this frequently happens, not because the cognitions are obscure in themselves, but because it is commonly very difficult to deviate
from the usual way of judging, and to observe this or that thing from
another side. He who, e.g., has learned dancing from a bad teacher, and
who is later supposed to start learning it from one with skill, finds it really
very hard to forget the accustomed old steps and movements of the feet
again, and to follow the newer, better method. So is it, too, with cognition^] everything that deviates from the old, already introduced kind of
cognition, of exposition, of writing-style, etc., is difficult to understand
and obscure.
All those who discover new methods in any of the sciences are obscure
in the beginning, thenf;] indeed, they are often disdained for just this
" "faßlich und Begreiflich."
95
reason, because we love the old far too much and do not want to depart
from it; until, with time, we have become comfortable with this new
method; since we find that it is often better than the old one.
Locke and Newton experienced the fate that in the beginning their writings were utterly obscure and not understandable, or at least they seemed
to be, until one subsequently considered them more closely and discovered their merits.
123 § 131
The doctrine of obscure cognitions is not at all logical but only metaphysical. Logica is not a science concerning the nature of the subject, of the
human soul, for cognizing what really lies hidden within it. Instead it
presupposes clear concepts and treats of the use of our understandingand
of our reason.
In our soul all cognitions actually lie hidden, and all that is necessary is
just to develop these cognitions, and to bring them into a brighter light.
Rational philosophy teaches us nothing new but only seeks to make
distinct what we already know and to bring us to consciousness of it.
But empirical philosophy, on the other hand, is occupied with bringing
us to new cognitions, which thus far we did not know.
§ i32
In this paragraph the author speaks of exhaustive clarity.
Completudo, however, is
1. externa
2. interna.
The former consists in the fact that the marks that are attributed to a
thing suffice to distinguish it from all other things.
The latter, however, consists in the fact that the marks of a thing are
sufficient to derive therefrom all its possible remaining determinations.
Completudo externa always presupposes completudo intema. Where the
latter is not, the former certainly is not either[;] and again the former,
namely, completudo externa, is attained by means of completudo interna. I
cannot know immediately that a thing and its marks are sufficient enough
to distinguish the thing from all remaining things[;] this must occur rather
through completudo interna.
124 Internal completudo is not only a means to external exhaustiveness, then;
rather, the latter cannot even be attained and acquired without the former.
No empirical concept can be internally complete, then. Thus internal
exhaustiveness does not occur in the case of objects of experience. From
this it follows at the same time that external exhaustiveness is also not to
96
be met with in the objecta of experience. For internal exhaustiveness is
always the ground of the external. E.g., in the case of metals, herbs,
plants, etc., I cannot cognize the thing according to all determinations,
consequently cannot yet distinguish it in every case from all other things.
In many books that treat of physics one finds definitiones of objects of
experience. But it is a certain proposition that these never are, nor can be,
correct and sufficient. For every definitio must be complete.
No one can attain a complete concept of objects of experience, then,
which would serve to distinguish them from all remaining things, merely
possible and real.
Therefore Locke made an effort to show that no one, however learned
he may be, could be in a position to state a correct definition of man. From
this it becomes clear, however, that none of our concepts of objects of
experience can ever be complete absolute^] but a completudo comparativa
can exist in their case, namely, when the marks of a thing suffice to
distinguish the thing from everything that we have cognized in experience
until now.
Pure concepts of reason can be both internally
and externally complete.
In the case of empirical concepts, the things outside us, about which we
judge," are the exemplaria,p and our concepts are the exemplata.11 In the case
of pure concepts, however, the concepts themselves are the exemplaria,
and those things of which we have the concepts are the exemplata, as, e.g.,
the concept of virtue, of right and wrong, of goodness, of legality and
illegality, of actions, of the simple and the composite, and of the contingent and the necessary.
These concepts do not arise at all from objects[;] therefore I cannot 125
represent their determination just in part; rather, they are arbitrary.
Reason is the creator of these concepts, and consequently the thing has
no other determination than what reason has attached to it.
Mathematica is of this kind[;] it has nothing but pure concepts of reason,
which can therefore be fully complete internally and externally. E.g., the
mathematicians think of a conus, a cone, or a right-angled triangle that
revolves around its cathetum' or one of its sides. Here he thinks everything
that suffices to distinguish the thing from all others, for the sphere is not a
thing outside him, which he has cognized in part according to certain
determinations, but rather a thing in his pure reason, which he thinks of
arbitrarily and in conformity with which he attaches certain determinations, whereby he intends that the thing should be capable of being differentiated from all other things.
° Reading "von denen wir urtheilen" for "die Urtheile."
f
patterns.
* copies.
' leg.
97
Only pure concepts of reason are exhaustive, then, but not objecta of
experience, which is distinctly clear from what was put forth previously.
No one should venture to define empirical concepts, then, but one can
well have correct definitiones of pure concepts of reason.
§ 133
The author speaks herein of cognition that is wholly or in part clear,
wholly or in part distinct.
Representations are wholly clear when the thing that I think of is
composed of no more determinations than the ones I thereby represent.
Representations are in part clear, however, when I do not think of each
and every determination, but only of some of its determinations.
Some of the ancient philosophers thus distinguished concepts into
rationes archetypal and extimcx [or] ektypas.' The former are to be regarded as archetypes and originaria, the latter as copies and exemplata."
The former include pure concepts of reason, the latter on the other
126 hand empirical concepts. The former can be wholly clear, but the latter,
on the contrary, are never wholly clear, but always only in part. If, e.g., I
see a house before me, and cannot go around it, then the house is only in
part clear for me, namely, in regard to the side that I have seen; the rest is
wholly obscure.
In the case of empirical concepts I always cognize only those determinations of the thing that excite our senses, and in fact in such a way that we
are conscious of them.
§ !35
Liveliness and strength of cognition are not opposita, but rather both are
combined with one another. Liveliness is an aesthetic perfection. Distinctness, however, rationabilitas,v or rather deep distinctness, is a logical perfection. The deeper the distinctness of a cognition is, the fainter its
liveliness becomes. The livelier a cognition is, on the other hand, the
shallower it is.
Liveliness in a cognition is attained with the help of much combination.0'
One attains distinctness in a cognition, however, when one seeks to produce it by means of much abstraction/
Through coordinate marks we make a cognition lively, but through
' Ak, "Archetypes"; MS, "Archtypas" (KI, Ixviii).
' Reading "Ektypas" instead of "ektypos," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
" Reading "exemplata" instead of "exemplares," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
" accessibilityto reason.
* "einer großen Verbindung."
* "einer großen Absonderung."
98
subordinate marks deeply distinct. Extensive distinctness is bound up with
the liveliness of a cognition, the deep distinctness of a cognition, on the
other hand, with its dryness. E.g., in a description of spring I represent it
in a lively way through a multitude of marks coordinate with one another.
The poet does it thus. He shows, e.g., the buddingflowers,the new green
of the forests, the cavorting herds, the renewed rays of the sun, the lovely,
charming air[,] the revival of the whole of nature.
In all oratory and poetry one seeks to put forth marks that are coordinate with one another, of which one is immediately aware in the thing to
be described, in order to make the concept of the thing lively.
By this means one reaches aesthetic perfection in a cognition. The
philosopher, however, who represents a thing with a deep distinctness,
emphasizes only one mark of the thing and omits the remaining ones, but 127
seeks out marks, and the grounds for the marks he thinks of in the thing.
His reason is occupied first and foremost with this, then.
When one represents the thing through subordinate marks, then, the
form of the cognition is wholly different from when one represents the
same thing through coordinate marks. Aesthetics is occupied only with
painting things, and with making them distinct through coordinate marks.
Reason, however, climbs from one mark to another and thus omits many
coordinate marksf;] but in this way cognition becomes dry.
The poet and the orator cognize much in few things. The philosopher,
on the other hand, considers many objects and cognizes little in many
objects. His cognitions are thus universal, they do not concern merely
individual objeäa, but rather whole genera of them. He represents only a
few marks, to be sure, but with a deep distinctness.
Distinctness of reason is a distinctness apriori,which I cognize through
marks apriori.
We cognize objeaa by means of extensive distinctness without needing
the use of reason, without engaging in reasoning/ But for deep distinctness reason is necessarily required.
For lively cognition sensibility is required. Sensibility is the perfection
of cognition when we represent a thing like objects of the senses.
Rationabilitas belongs to things insofar as we think of them through
general concepts. But sensibility, on the other hand, insofar as we represent a thing through individual concepts.
All sensibility brings about liveliness. Suitability to reason,2 however,
produces dryness. Our concepts of reason attain sensibility when we
represent universal judgments in concreto. This happens, e.g., through
examples and similia.
The sensibility of a cognition is not in any way an imperfection of it. In
* "vernünfteln."
"Vernunftmäßigkeit."
99
sensibility we think of the universal - into which we already have insight
in abstract cognitions - in concreto in those cases in which it really occurs.
Extensive clarity of cognition, bound up with sensibility, produces liveliness.
128 Our understanding always vacillates here, as it were, between 2 hazards. If we seek to cognize something aesdietically perfectly, then we soon
lack the correct grounds, that which is solid in cognition, and we end up in
shallowness. But on the other hand, if we cognize something through
logical perfection, then we very easily lack aesthetic liveliness, etc., and we
fall into dryness. Indeed, it is actually quite hard to hit the right mean
between the two dangerous wrong tracks.
Nevertheless, it is also possible to unite both perfections with one
another to a high degree.
Clarity of cognition, like completeness, completudo, is
A. extensiv a
B. intensiva.
Claritas extemiva rests on a multitude of coordinate marks, which are
cognized in a thing immediately.
It is the right path to liveliness, in that it brings with it much sensibility,
for the latter just consists in coordinatio of its marks.
The completion of the perfections of all our cognitions is finally to give
them sensibility, so that one represents the universal in particular circumstances and cases and thinks of the abstractum in concreto in a single,
individual sensible case. E.g., if I think of friendship, true love, and the
mutual helpfulness that flows from these, in die case of Damon and
Pythias.22 Here, then, I think the universal in individual cases. But in this
way my cognition becomes lively[,] e.g., when I think of patriotism in
Cato.
Without sensibility our pure cognition of reason is just very impoverished.
Extensive clarity and liveliness require only understanding, because
with coordinate marks I do nothing but judge.
Claritas intensiva, however, rests on subordinate marks[,] and reason is necessarily required for this, because in this case we infer and
derive one mark from the other.
Claritas extensiva serves for the description of an object. Claritas
129 intensiva, however, investigates the grounds of the thing. From one mark
belonging to the thing, it seeks [to infer] dial another mark must also
belong to the thing. It seeks to find out the cause of things, then, and
always asks for the why. Why this, and why that, indeed, why is it not
otherwise? .
The senses give us lively but not fully distinct cognition.
He who can narrate everything that he has ever seen, completely and in
100
order, possesses much liveliness of cognitionf;] indeed, by this narration
he can often bring about a lively cognition in others.
Sensible clarity is nothing other than liveliness[;] in intuition there is
clarity, but sensible clarity. Clarity through universal concepts is a logical
clarity.
Mathematics is the only science that is in a position to judge according
to its concepts.
He who is able to combine in his cognition both liveliness and deep
distinctness has in fact alreadyreached the highest degree of perfection of
human cognitionf;] but this is so hard that it seems to be almost impossible for everybody.
Through sensibility perfection of reason is not lost at all; rather, it only
attains greater liveliness.
From this we see completely distinctly, then, that sensibility does not
conflict at all with rational perfection, but rather it furthers this latter in
certain cases[;] indeed, it often brings about for it a greater correctness, in
that we frequently omit, and have to omit, in abstracto marks which actually
belong to the nature of the thing, but which can be restored when one
considers the thing in concrete. Orators and poets can frequently be very
helpful to the philosopher, therefore.
This is a most universal rule of good, and especially of learned exposition: Combine sensibility with an exposition and give it to your instruction.
Logical clarity, however, rests on subordination^] sensible clarity, on
the other hand, rests on coordination of marks.
In just this way, we can also have A. a sensible distinctness accord- 130
ing to aesthetic laws.
and B. a logical distinctness according
to logical laws.
We must often abstract, but this is actually very hard for us, too.
ist Sensible distinctness according to laws of aesthetics is nothing other than
distinctness of intuition.
2nd Logical distinctness, on the other hand, according to laws of the understanding and of reason, or of logic, is nothing other than the distinctness of
reflection.
Something can be very lively, but all the less distinct[;] again, something
can be appropriate, many-colored, and lively, but at the same time still not
very distinct, and confused.
§ 139
It is false that our cognition becomes distinct only through analysis, as the
author maintains.
101
Our cognition can be made distinct in two ways
A. per synthesin
B. per analysin.
But here we must distinguish well between the science of making a
distinct cognition and the science of making distinct a cognition that was
previously obscure. Namely, we either make a distinct concept, and this
happens per synthesin, or we make distinct a concept that was previously
confused, and this happens per analysin.
In synthesis we produce and create a concept, as it were, which simply
was not there before, [one that is] completely new both quoad materiam"
and also quoadformam[;]b and at the same time we make it distinct.
All the concepts of the mathematicians are of this kind, e.g., the concepts of triangle, square, circle, etc.
All concepts fabricated' by reason are at the same time distinct, but only
131 per synthesin. If a concept is made distinct per analysin then it must
already be given[;] thus we are occupied with making clear and distinct
what is confused and obscure in this given concept, with developing, with
explicating, and thus with illuminating it. This includes, e.g., each and
every concept of metaphysics.
With these one is supposed to become conscious solely and simply of
the marks that belong to the thing[,] e.g., with the concepts of virtue, of
vice[;] and we therefore need do nothing but analyze and explicate/ make
the confused concepts distinct.
The matter is already diere, then, we are only supposed to give the
thing a form. By means of analytical distinctness we do not cognize any
more in a thing than we have already thought in it previously; instead we
only cognize better, i.e., more distinctly, more clearly, and with more
consciousness, what we already actually knew. E.g., with the concept of
perfection I will first direct someone to the cases in which he makes use of
the expression perfection, in order thereby to instruct him what he really
understands by perfection [,] what sort of concept he makes of it, and what
he thinks when he utters the word perfection and ascribes it to a thing.
Here he will find, naturally, that he calls many things perfect that are
really very imperfect, or are even quite vicious. E.g., the libertine takes his
vaga libido' to be the greatest possible perfection. For if this did not exist, it
would be impossible for him to indulge it so strongly, and to find in it a
pleasure so very great, which obscures everything else for him. Analysis,
as to matter.
as to form.
"fingirte."
"zu Analysiren, aus einander zu setzen, und zu zergliedern."
restless desire.
102
then, really amounts to making the confused distinct. The composition of
cognition/however, or synthesis, is helpful and useful simply and solely to
produce something new and at the very same time, all at once, to make it
distinct.
In general, all concepts of the human understanding are either
ist conceptus datior
2nd conceptus facti.
A conceptus datus[,] a given concept[,] is one that is produced either
through the nature of our understanding or through experience.
Conceptus facti[,] concepts that are made, are such as are created by 132
us arbitrarily, or fabricated, without previously having been given.
All these fabricated concepts are produced simultaneously with their
distinctness.
Here, namely, one fabricates something arbitrarily, and in fact simultaneously with the consciousness of it.
There are many such conceptus facti in aesthetics and in mathematics. In
philosophia, on the other hand, there are conceptus dati.
A cognition does not become distinct through analysis alone, for the
action whereby a cognition becomes distinct is one and the same with that
through which its marks become clear.
A cognition can acquire distinctness of reason per analysin, but also
distinctness of the understanding per analysin.
Through analysis I merely bring the marks of a cognition under more
universal marks, into which I previously had insight per analysin apriori.
But per synthesin I learn in addition new marks of a cognition a posteriori[,]
e.g., with the concept of the essence of gold.
The latter is empirical distindness; the former, however, is distinctness of
the understanding, which has its origin in my reason and occurs by means
of analysis. E.g., morals is nothing more than the exposition of our ethical
representations, of virtue, of the good, of evil. Socrates said: I am the
midwife of my listeners' thoughts.
To make a cognition is to fabricate[.]
We now want briefly to indicate the degrees of the representations of all
cognitions.
i. "in general, to represent something* is the most universal and most usual[,]
also the easiest cognition of a thing. But representing something, where
consciousness is combined with it, is distinct from simply representing, where
we are frequently not even conscious to what these representations are
actually related."
f "Die Zusammensetzung der Erkennmiß."
* "sich etwas vorstellen."
103
Sibi aliquid repraesentare id est cognoscere, repraesentatio.h
133 But when there is combined with such representation the capacity of
bringing what I represent under a universal concept, and thus of being
able to know to what my representation actually is related, then this is
the
2nd degree, namely, to be acquainted,' "then I am acquainted with what I represent."
3. "the following degree is to understand1 something, i.e., to be acquainted with
something through the understanding, or to be acquainted with something
distinctly through a distinct concept."
Nature provides us with many things that we are able to be acquainted
with but not really to understand. Furthermore,
4. To have insight* Much "that exists in nature we do understand, but we do
not have insight into it. E.g., the growth of plants."
To have insight is to cognize something through and by means of reason, that
is, a priori. "Here, then, the thing need not even be given to me. Men
frequently believe that they already have insight into something when they
are only in a position to give an explanation of it."
To make[,] facere[,] a cognition is to fabricate it[,] fingere.
A conceptus factitius is thus at the same time a conceptus fictitius.
To make a cognition arbitrarily and with consciousness is thus to make a
distinct cognition.
All mathematical definitiones, e.g., are merely fabricated and are thus
nothing but concepts of the thing that are made, arbitrary, [and] distinct.
5. "To comprehend1 something is finally the last and highest degree[,] namely: it is
to have insight into something through reason, but in such a way that it is
sufficient for a certain purpose, that is, to have insight comparative^."
But if I have insight into something sufficiently for any and every
purpose, this is just comprehending absolute^."1
Much that I really understand, am acquainted with, and have insight
into, I still do not on that account -comprehend. And on the other hand,
what I comprehend comparative^ I do not yet therefore comprehend
absolute.
134 In the whole of nature there is nothing at all into which we have insight
absolute^, that is[,] sufficient for every purpose.
To represent something is to cognize, is representation.
"kennen."
"verstehen.'"
"Einsehen."
"begreifen."
"so ist dieses das Absolute schlechthin begreifen."
104
Suffirientia notarum rei est completudo, et est"
A. externa, i.e., when the marks that I have of a thing are complete and sufficient enough to distinguish this thing from all others. Thus the whole concept
of it must be known.
Always, then, an externally sufficient concept is always internally sufficient, too. Furthermore, conversely, an internally sufficient concept is
always externally sufficient, too.And a concept that is not internally sufficient is not externally sufficient either, and one that is not externally
sufficient is again not internally sufficient either.
Philosophia est vel pura, vel applicata0 •
In philosophia pura each and every concept is given through the understanding and through reason. E.g.,the concepts of the possible, and again
of the impossible, of the necessary, and of the contingent.
Omnes conceptus sunt velp
1. pure rationales
2. empirici.
All concepts are made distinct through analysis, that is per analysin,
where previously they were obscure and confused. By this means one
learns, namely, to have insight into the partial concepts of a complete
concept.
A distinct concept arises, however, per synthesin.
With analysis^ the concept either becomes completelydistinct, or it does
not.
All my concepts of reason can become completely distinct, but empirical concepts are excluded from this and always remain incompletely distinct.
§ 140
Here in this pangraphus the author speaks of the comprehensible and the
incomprehensible. To acquire a better idea of this, we intend first to represent the degrees of human cognition once more. This cannot be further
described, nor defined.
The ist degree is to knowq something, that is, to represent something with 135
consciousness.
The 2nd degree is to be acquainted' with something, i.e., to be able to
Sufficiency of the marks of a thing is completeness, and it is .
Philosophy is either pure or applied.
All concepts are either . ..
"wißen."
"kennen."
105
cognize something in distinction from other things through comparison
with those things.
The jrd degree is to understand1 somethingf,] i.e., to cognize something
distinctly through the understanding.
The 4th degree, finally, is to have insight" into something, or to cognize
something through reason.
When I have insight into something, I cognize it through mediate
marks, I infer, then, and thus search for a nota notae, a mark of the mark.
If I am to understand something, the understanding must be occupied
with it[;] I must cognize a thing through immediate marks, but in doing so
I must also judge.
To understand something is far easier than to have insight into something, for in the first case it is only necessary that I coordinate the marks of
a thing, but in the other case I must subordinate them. To understand
what gold is I need nothing more than to know the properties of this
metal, that it is, e.g.,ductile, yellow, heavier than others, etc., that it does
not rust. But to have insight into what gold is I must investigate one of its
marks in particular and abstract from it its ground. E.g., why it does not
rust, why is it ductile, heavier than others.
The fifth and highest degree of our cognition, finally, is to comprehend"
something, that is, to have insight into something sufficiently, or to the
degree that is necessary for a certain insight.
One can comprehend something either absolute^, or wholly* or else
partialiter, i.e.,relative^.
I comprehend something relative^" when I have insight into it in such a
way as is required for this or thatend.
We never comprehend something totaliter or absolute^. Even the most
learned among us cannot boast that he has insight into something in such
a way that it serves for all purposes. With respect to religion the common
man, if only he has a healthy understanding, always comprehends as much
as the greatest theologus, as much as it is necessary for him to know in
order to live righteously and to be able to arrange all of his actions
according to God's laws.
136 Nevertheless, this will never be sufficient for all his ends.
In regard to the practical perfection of cognition, we all have equal
insights, then, although we differ as to our insights with respect to logical
perfection[;] however, even he who has greater insights and more extensive cognitions comprehends nothing absolute^.
"verstehen."
"einsehen."
"begreifen."
"Totaliter gäntzlich."
Reading "Relative" for "Absolute."
106
The author wrongly translates the word to comprehend' by concipere,
although concipere really means nothing other than to have insight."
The 6 degrees of our cognition, of which we have spoken more extensively above, are rather
1. repraesentare to represent
2. scire to know
3. nos cere to be acquainted with
4. intelligere to understand
5. concipere to have insight
6. comprehendere to comprehend
Frequently something that is comprehensible to one man is incomprehensible to another.
In the beginning something is not comprehensible to us, which, in the
course of time, can be comprehended by us very easily. Nevertheless, we
can frequently err in that we believe and fully hold that others will comprehend what we ourselves do not comprehend, et vice versa, if we take it to be
the case that what we do not comprehend is incomprehensible to others.
If I am to make distinct the concepts of a thing, then my representation
of it must first be clear. Then I must attend to the various marks of the
thing; after that I must consider many marks in a thing together, or
compare them, hold them up to one another and compare them with one
another. In this comparison there occurs not only a mere collection2 of its
marks, but rather a placing next to one another[,]" a coordination of them.
Finally, however, comes abstractio notarum, or that action in which, in
making distinct its representation, I ignore all such marks of a thing as 137
could hinder and disturb me, or are not of use to me and thus are
superfluous.
§ 144
In this § the author shows the distinction of distinct cognition into cognitio
totaliter or partialiter distinaa.b
Frequently one cognizes an object distinctly as to one part, but indistinctly as to another.
In experience much is hidden from us, but in logic more distinctness is
to be found.
Indistinctness really arises from lack of attention to the parts of a whole
concept.
* "begreifen."
* "Einsehen."
* "Collection oder Samlung."
' "eine Nebeneinander Stellung."
* cognition that is totally [or] partially distinct.
107
One usually ascribes the responsibility for this indistinctness either to
the thing itself, of which one has indistinct' cognition, or to the person and
the subject in which the indistinctness of the cognition exists. When a
thing has far too many marks, so that one is not in a position to survey
them all at once, then the responsibility for the indistinctness of it necessarily lies in the thing itself.
With empirical concepts there is always more confusion than with the
concepts of reason.
Concepts of experience spring up through the excitement of our senses,
but these latter cannot have insight into all the determinations of the
things, but rather many of them still remain hidden from us and unknown.
§ 147
Our cognitions are either
1. adequate^ i.e., complete or
2. incomplete and not adequate.
Following Baumgarten, and Baumgarten in turn following Wolff, the
author in this paragmphus has named a certain kind of distinct cognition
complete.
If the marks of a thing are cognized fully distinctly, then this is intensive
clarity of cognition of the first degree; but if I cognize the immediate
marks of a thing distinctly, but derive from these other, mediate marks,
138 then this distinctness of cognition is intensive clarity of the 2nd degree,
and in Wolff's expression, [it is] the completeness of cognition[.] E.g.,
when I say: vice is a readiness^ to sin.
Now readiness is ease in acting/ To sin, however, is nothing other than
to live contrary to moral rules and laws. Vice is thus a readiness to perform
actions^that are contrary to the moral laws.
This 2nd degree of intensive distinctness of cognition cannot possibly
be completeness, however, for otherwise the third degree of distinctness
would have to be more complete. And this would go further and further.
Here all comparison ceases, and if something is already complete absolute^, then there can be nothing to be found that would be more complete.
The author has, in an improper way, called a complete cognition an
adaequata cognitio, and again incomplete cognitions cognitiones inadaequatae.
Completeness itself, however, consists in nothing other than completudo,
and precision.
' Reading "undeutliche" for"deutliche."
4 "Fertigkeit."
' "eine Leichtigkeit zuhandelen."
f "Handlungen zu ediren."
108
A cognition is complete (cognitio rei adaequatag), then, when the representation of a thing is really in conformity with and is adequate to it,* so
the cognition contains nothing more, but also nothing less, than really lies
in the thing: Si repraesentatio rei de re quadam nee supra, nee infra
rem est.'
All distinctness through subordination of marks is of various degrees,
and hence one cannot call a cognition complete until its marks are no
longer subordinated to any other concept.
§ I49-I5I
Completudo, or exhaustiveness, we have already considered above, and we
will speak more of precision afterward in what follows.
Completudo consists in nothing other than the sufficiency' of a distinct
concept of a thing for the derivation therefrom of all of the thing's remaining marks.
Omnis cognitio sufficiens estk
A. extensiva, that is[,] exhaustiveness
B. intensiva[,] that is[,] thoroughness.
For thoroughness, then, profundity' is required[;] thus it includes proof, 139
and is attained by ascent to the highest mark of many marks subordinated
to one another.
Some complete thoroughness is required in regard to morals.
Nevertheless, we quite frequently err here too. Thus it is, e.g., with a
certain casus necessitates,m like a necessary lie, a Christian deception, etc.
Exhaustiveness properly consists in nothing other than the fact that nothing is lacking, that the concept can be whole.
Nevertheless, even in the case of this exhaustiveness an error can occur,
namely, if my concept contains too much, [more] than it should contain in
order, accordingly, to be complete.
There is yet another perfection, which comes to this, that neither more
nor less than is necessary is contained therein. And this perfection is
called precision."
A cognition is precise, then, when it has not too many marks and not
too few.
1
a cognition adequate to the thing.
* "derselben recht gemäß, und angemeßen."
If the representation of a thing is, concerning the thing itself, neither above nor below the
thing.
' "Sufficienz, oder Zureichung."
All sufficient cognition is ...
"Tiefsinnigkeit."
™ case of necessity.
"dieAbgemeßenheit, die Praeäsion."
109
Cognitio estpraeäsa, quando non abundat notis."
But precision is the determinate degree of marks, then, in accordance
with which they do not contain more than is necessary in order to derive
from them all remaining determinations of the thing.
It requires more effort to make a cognition precise than to bring it to
superfluous thoroughness, i.e., more than to make it complete.
Precision is actually a great and difficult art[;] one sees this more easily
in all cases, even by means of experience; thus even the mathematician,
who is otherwise so precise, nevertheless finds no precision in the squaring of the circle. The calculations that have previously occurred for this
are all such that the number arrived at was either too great or too small,
and it has not yet been possible to hit it correctly.
But to be in a position to be able to observe such precision in regard to
philosophical concepts, this certainly involves far more art and skill. A
complete and precise concept, taken together, is adequate to the thing, and
then such a concept is called a conceptus adaequatus. Cognitio rei
adaequata.p
140 The situation here with marks is like that with a measure. A measure is
adequate to the thing when it contains neither more nor less than is
necessary for quantity to be measured. A mark is also adequate to the
thing of which it is to be the mark when it contains neither more nor less
than lies in the concept of the thing.
With completudo I take care that there is not too little in the cognition,
but with precision I see to it that there is not too much in it. Completudo, as
is easy to see, is always much more necessary than praedsio, for although
superfluity in cognition is a mistake, which one makes an effort to avoid as
far as possible [,] we can better and more easily bear that than a lack in
cognition.
Precision is properly a perfection only relatively,because it helps one to
deal with his cognitions* economically, and not to use his powers on a
thing superfluously and thus, as it were, to squander them where it is not
necessary, so that one afterward has no faculty for other, more useful
cognitions. Precision is thus nothing other than a rule of economy, which
just for that reason has a certain internal beauty; it is to be found especially in mathematics, geometry, and mechanics.
The superfluous' in a concept comes about, then, just when one
concept already lies in the other, and this superfluity is always a consequence of lack in praedsio.
One says in many words, and more than are required, what one could
have expressed and said in a few. Just as when in arithmetic one expresses
° Cognition is precise when the marks are not superfluous.
f Cognition is adequate to the thing.
* "Kenntnißen."
' "Das Überflüßige, dasAbundans."
110
a fraction in very large, lengthy5 numerals, which one would have been
able to express just as well and correctly in a few small numbers.
There is a certain kind of precision in proofs, too, in accordance with
which there is not a single proposition more or less than serves for conviction. One finds such exceptional precision likewise in mathematica. This
beautiful science, as we see, is thus a model in many respects, and there
has always been an effort to establish its properties, and among them in 141
particular precision, in philosophy.
In the case of systematic exposition and cognition, precision is a principal perfection.
With beautiful^] i.e., aesthetic cognitions, on the other hand, precision
is a dispensable perfection.
In oratory and poetry, one is not miserly with expressions, but frequently
rather far too wasteful. One frequently says a thing more than once, but
nevertheless only with other expressions and in other images. Precision is
thus merely a rule of economy and ofcleverness, but not at all oftaste and of
aesthetics. Precision is only a rule of cleverness[;] it is thus hard to attain,
and that precision where one is precise and economical in his expressions,
so that someone else thereby attains a certain degree of clarity of concept, is
a particular talent, and thus also a work of genius, very difficult, indeed,
almost impossible to attain through mere art. Each and every aphorism isof
this kind, all proverbs have a certain kind of precision or adequacy. By
means of these one says something complete and wisewith few expressions.
Precision thus belongs merely to logical perfection.
In the i^istparagraphus the author calls precision of cognition a determinate cognition. This expression is wholly wrong, however.
Indeterminate marks are such as contain too little, and our author says
again that indeterminate marks are such marks as contain too much, or
more. Something can be complete without containing any precision at all.
Now we will speak somewhat more of profound cognition. Intensive distinctness in a cognition has various degrees, as we heard earlier.
A greater degree of distinctness of cognition through subordinate marks
is deep distinctness. A higher degree of distinctness of cognition through
coordinate marks, on the other hand, is extensive distinctness. I cannot attain
depth of cognition unless I go from one mark to the other, and in this way
cognize one mark of the thing mediately through another.
Profundity is nothing but the faculty for profound distinctness, or for a 142
long series of marks by means of, or mediately through, ascent. Here I
ascend from experiences that I have had to their first grounds, or from the
first grounds to the first experiences.
The first, from which I here begin, can be either the first, or also, if I
end there, the last.
* "weitläuftigen."
Ill
§ 154
In this paragraphus the author teaches us nothing more than a mere
name. He does not show us here how one can and should make concepts
lucid and clear, but merely acquaints us with the name of a thinker who
has clear concepts.
Some men are of such a kind that they foolishly fancy that only in their
own minds are things lucid. While on the other hand they think that other
people have nothing but obscure and confused concepts. "In their minds
alone is there a Goshen,2s while everything else, in contrast, is hidden in
Egyptian darkness."
A learned man, however, must strive above all to attain clear and distinct concepts of the things that are or can be objects of his considerations[.]
THE SIXTH SECTION
Of the certainty of learned cognition
§ 155
Certainty is nothing but subjective necessity in the quality of judgments.
The opposite of judgments is the denial of what is affirmed in the judgments, or also the affirmation of what is denied in the judgment.
Many judgments are so constituted that their opposite appears to me to
have to be completely impossible, and it is thereby necessary subjective^.
143 Everything that is true is just for this reason at the same time certain
subjective^.
Objective necessity is thus really truth.
In a multitude of cases we find that we judge much to be true that we
always find subjective^ in certain cases to be uncertain, indeed, whose
opposite we even find to be possible.
It is clear, then, that the uncertainty of a cognition rests merely on its
objective falsehood, while the certainty of a cognition, on the other hand,
rests on its objective truth.
If something is true, then it is at the same time certain[;] if something is
false, it is always at the same time without doubt uncertain.
The true cannot be false objective^, that is, based on the constitution of a
thing, or on a true property[;] it cannot be uncertain whether it is true or
false.
All uncertainty is thus grounded in the subject and is subjective, i.e., it
is grounded in him who is not in a position to have insight and to cognize
something as true or as false.
Every ground of truth is a ground of holding-to-be-true[;] every ground
112
of cognition, even supposing that it is insufficient, is nevertheless a
ground for holding-to-be-true.
All holding-to-be-true based on grounds concerning which we do not
investigate whether they contain a large or a small degree of truth is
plausibility. If the degree of truth is greater than the degree of the grounds
of the opposite, then the cognition is probable. Here, then, there does not
exist in the slightest any settled truth.
With probability, there really is sufficient ground, but yet this ground of
truth is greater than the grounds of the opposite[; it] outweighs them.'
Holding-to-be-true on account of the illusion of cognition is called persuasion.
Here one accepts any degree of truth in order to be able to approve a
cognition, without investigating whether the grounds of the opposite have
a greater degree of truth or not. Judgment according to the measure of
probability is not persuasion[;] instead, judgment from mere plausibility
is. Persuasion is really a kind of delusion; for one always considers only 144
the one side, without in the least reflecting on the opposite side, which is
most detrimental, however.
Consciousness of a cognition, however, through the sufficient ground of
its truth, is called conviction. This arises solely from reason's consciousness
of the necessary in the cognition. Where there is a contingent cognition,
which can be thus but can also be other than it really is, there is no
conviction. One can suitably represent conviction as composed of many
moments or elements, i.e., of small degrees of persuasion and of holding-tobe-true, and can accept all the moments or degrees of holding-to-be-true
and of persuasion as being of the same kind.
When the moments of holding-to-be-true constitute exactly half of the
sufficient ground, then a cognition is uncertain, doubtful[;] ambigua ejus
modi cognitio." Here the mind always remains undecided, thenf;] it
swings, as it were, between fear and hope. There are on the one side
exactly as many grounds as on the other, which balance one another.
But if there is even one more degree of truth on the side of the insufficient ground than there is on the side of the opposite, then the cognition is
no longer ambigud" but rather probable.
But if on the other hand there is a lesser degree of truth on the side of
the insufficient ground than there is on the side of its opposite, then the
cognition is not only uncertain, not probable, either, but even improbable.
Nevertheless, the cognition still remains plausible. Hence it cannot simply
be rejected, for plausibility requires merely the slightest degree of truth.
All certainty is to be regarded as a unity, and as a complete whole, and
Reading "dieselben" for "dieselbe."
Cognition of this mode is uncertain,
uncertain.
113
thus is the measure of all the rest of our holding-to-be-true, and of each
and every one of its degrees.
Certainty, however, arises from nothing but the relation of equality
between the grounds of cognition that I have and the whole sufficient
ground itself.
If the grounds of cognition that I have are not equal to the whole sufficient ground, then my cognition is uncertain. It is true that there is a certain
145 dissimilarityin objectsand concepts, but concepts can nonetheless become
homogeneous if one brings the manifold under a universal concept.
This production of similarityarises merely from comparison. One compares, or holds up the ground of truth against the grounds of falsehood[;]
then sees whether the grounds of truth contain a greater degree of truth
than the grounds of the opposite[;] and then, after more mature reflection,
makes a judgment that is more correct and more fitting concerning the
probability and improbability of a cognition.
If we had no cognition of the sufficient ground of certainty, we would
not be able to make any judgment whatsoever concerning the probability
or improbability of a thing. All of these arise, namely, from the relation of
our grounds of cognition to certainty. One is accustomed, however, always
to assent at first to that of which one has several convincing grounds of
truth, and which one sees by oneself.
The mere sufficient ground is sufficient objective^, but the insufficient
ground subjectiveL. The former determines in the thing what ought to be
held concerning it, but the latter, on the other hand, is very doubtful[;] for
it is quite easy to see that today one can have more, but tomorrow once
again fewer grounds of truth concerning a cognition.
The sufficient ground, however, is the one whose opposite cannot possibly be thought or represented as true.
Naturally, then, it actually contains everything that exists in the thing.
The insufficient grounds, on the other hand, include"" only what we think
and represent of the thing, and what we cognize of it.
As we have just said, then, certainty and the sufficient ground are the
measuring stick. All judgments are plausible, not probable, when no relation of the grounds of cognition to certainty exists in them.
This plausibility can change very much, however.
Probability and improbability are objective grounds. Plausibility, however, is
a subjeäive ground[\] that is, probability and improbability lie in the object
itself, in the thing that is to be cognized; plausibility, on the other hand,
lies in him who has no cognition of a thing.
146 In a subject, is the condition the same whether the cognition it has is
only a persuasion or a certain truth, a conviction, or not? It is not thereby
altered externally at all, not even in the least.
" "enumeriren."
114
But it is simply not possible at all to state an infallible, certain, and
universal mark of conviction, for distinction from persuasion.
Now since it is impossible to state really and with certainty which
grounds of judgment and of persuasion lie in the object and which in the
subject, we accordingly make the following important general remark,
namely, "every error properly arises only because we confound the causes
of approval that lie in the object itself with those grounds that lie in the
subject."
To investigate, however, whether something that we accept is actually a
merely plausible and invalid persuasion or an actual, certain conviction,
one first of all weighs the grounds of the opposite in particular.
If I find now that I meet with grounds for the opposite of my cognition
as numerous and as important as for that to which I have actually assented, then from this I easily see that my whole cognition must have been
not a conviction at all but rather merely a persuasion[,] aphaenomenon of
conviction.
All of our representations together are such phenomenaf.] E.g., in the
case of the rainbow it seems as if it were supported by the earth; it is a
mere appearance, therefore[;] on closer investigation, namely, we see that
this is not so.
Experience teaches us that the strength of our persuasion of a thing can
be and is just as great as our conviction of its opposite is afterwards.
A means for sensing what is really necessary and required for true
conviction, then, is the following: to study industriously such sciences as
open the most certain path, i.e., which actually convince us of certain
truths. E.g., mathematics[.] Furthermore, let one devote himself to such
sciences as confirm the grounds of reason through experience, as, e.g.,
experimental physica.
Since we lack a universally sufficient mark, then, for correctly and
infallibly distinguishing the subjective grounds of holding-to-be-true
from the objective ones, the phenomenon of conviction based on true 147
certainty and conviction, we have to be satisfied with striving to convince
ourselves in individual cases of the certainty of this thing or that, so that at
least we can always be in a position to distinguish the false from the true.
But in order to be able carefully to avoid error in this or that cognition,
one must take note of, and observe, the following:
ist "One must compare his cognition of this or that object with the cognitions
of other people concerning one and the same object1 and carefully hold
them up against one another, since it is not to be supposed that every man
should have one and the same grounds moving him to hold one and the
same thing to be true[;] instead there is the greatest probability that what
one person considers from one side, someone else, who thinks something
"über ein, und eben dasselbige Object, über ein, und eben denselben Gegenstand."
115
else and who conceives the whole thing differently, will be opposed from
the other side."
2nd "One must accept and suppose the opposite of the cognition that one has[;]
one must place oneself, as it were, in the position of his opponent and of
one who disputes the truth of my cognition, and then look to see whether it
may be thought as true or at least as probable. Even if this occurs only to
some extent, one still has cause to put some distrust in the truth of the
cognition he has. If this does not in the least occur, and if I can impartially
see and also maintain that the opposite of the cognition that I have would be
absurd, impossible, and that it would be foolish to want to accept it, then
from this it becomes clear that my cognition must be true and correct."
Etc., etc., etc. In respect of certainty, however, there are three various
kinds or degrees of holding-to-be-true
1. knowing
2. opining
3. believing.
148 ist To know is to judge something and hold it to be true with certainty.
To know something, then, involves a great deal. I can never say that I
know that there are inhabitants on the moon[;] I have not been there, I
have not seen them.
2nd To opine is to judge something incompletely, and this occurs when
the grounds that we have for taking something to be true are insufficient
and do not outweigh the opposite, and this is then an opinion/
In these opinions, however, the grounds, and thereby also the degrees of
holding-to-be-true, can grow and increase; but it is to be noted that in the
case of opining one always remains undecided
To opine something practically, however, involves
3. believing. Here I am always decided, without however finding it
necessary for me to be decided.
Opinions are thus nothing but subjectively incomplete grounds for
taking-to-be-true.
Man always opines.
To accept something without a subjective necessity according to logical
concepts is to believe.
A logical necessity, however, is nothing but the necessity of holding-tobe-true according to logical laws of the understanding and of reason.
The necessity, however, of accepting something according to practical
laws is always subjective. To believe is thus nothing but to accept something of which I am not yet logically certain.
Belief, furthermore, is also a practically sufficient holding-to-be-true.
Certainty, on the other hand, is a holding-to-be-true that is also theoretically sufficient.
y "eine Opinion."
116
In the case of believing, I am not at all inclined to listen to my opponent's
grounds. For my grounds for holding-to-be-true are in this case always
practically sufficient. In the case of believing there is also a certain direction of our judgment through the will.
If I accept something, then I do not yet consider it to be certain, and
thus, when I concede something, then I do not at all hold it to be true.
A practical certainty would be firm belief, and both as to its conviction
and as to its power to destroy all doubts this will be as strong as belief in 149
accordance with logical laws ever can be. Indeed, this belief is frequently
stronger than many an apodeictic certainty concerning its cognition. This
occurs, however, only in the case of universal cognitions2
A. of reason
B. of experience.
We can also believe something without thereby attaining a practical certainty of it, but merely at the most a greater degree of holding-to-be-true.
There is also practical holding-to-be-true, and certain believing, whose
suspension would suspend and nullify all universal and necessary laws of
the practical will, of the whole of morals, ethical doctrine, theology, religion, etc., and [nullify] what can only be thought sublime[;] and all of this
is firm belief, then.
Of such propositions we have 2:
1. There is a God.
2. There is another world.
These 2 propositions are the only ground of all religion, morality, etc.
These 2 propositions are the true conditio sine qua non.
Belief in these 2 propositions is not historical but rather rational, derived from practical rules of reason.
This belief is not an opinion but a certainty, which is so constituted,
however, that although it is not actually apodeictic nor irrefutable according to the laws of logic, it still nonetheless outweighs by far all holding-tobe-true that is based on logical grounds, and is superior to these.
When it comes to deciding about all our well-being, our happiness and
unhappiness, apodeictic certainty, which comes and arises merely from the
understanding, does not have the inner force to compel the subject to
hold to it, however convincing it otherwise is.
So is it even with mathematical propositions and demonstrations, which
otherwise have the greatest and surest certainty. However certain it is that
a circle has 360°, however apodeictic the Platonic theorems in geometry
are, still no one would want to die for their infallibility and irrefutability.
Belief in accordance with practical, and in particular in accordance with
"Kenntnißen."
117
moral laws, however, has full power to strengthen the subject who has it
150 with full confidence, and to bring that subject to the point that it will hold
to it* in spite of all dangers and unhappiness[,] even when it concerns* the
decision concerning everything that affects the subject's weal and woe.
People have been seen to die for moral propositions, after all.
The resolve not to allow oneself to be diverted by anything is more a
resolve of practical and moral belief, then, than an effect of apodeictic
certainty, and it is far more unshakeable, indeed, it in fact always carries
with it a certain kind of merit.
A cognition is certain objective^ when it contains those grounds in
accordance with which all men, in respect of it, must agree. A cognition is
certain subjectively, however, when it contains the manner in which all men
actually agree in respect of it.
Perspicuousness is the intuitive' in certainty, evidence/ Thus, e.g., mathematical propositions are evident. But we are certain of many things without their having evidence.
We have 2 methods for grounds of holding-to-be-true. The agreement
of other men with our opinions, and the testing of our thought according
to other men's sentiments, is really a most outstanding logical test of our
understanding by the understanding of others. Man needs this communication'' of his cognitions very much in order to be able to pass judgment on
them rightly.
Men have a natural inclination to communicate to others the judgments
that their understanding has made, and merely from this arises the writing
of books, whose cause has otherwise been set down to vanity,to ambition,
by other critics of the human race, who would happily interpret everything
most unfavorably.
Men who separate themselves from all human society necessarily find.
in the end, when they begin to investigate their condition and the causes
of their misanthropy, that they do not themselves have enough means to
distinguish the true from the false.
The freedom to communicate one's thoughts, judgments, [and] cognitions-^ is certainly the only[,] most certain means to test one's cognitions*
properly, however, and to verify* them. And he who takes away this free-
151 dom is to be regarded as the worst enemy of the extension of human
cognition, indeed, of men themselves. For just by this means he takes
' Reading"anhängt" for"anzuhangen,"with Hinske (KI, bodii).
* "angeht, betrift."
' "das Intuitive, das Anschauende."
' "die Evidenz."
' "diese Mittheilung, diese Communication."
f "Kenntniße."
* "Kenntniße."
* "verificiren."
118
away from men the one true means they still possess for ever uncovering,
becoming aware of, and correcting the frequent deception of their own
understanding and its false steps.
Theft of the right to think without constraint and to bring one's thoughts
to light, is really theft of the first rights and of the greatest advantages, of
the human race, and especially of the human understanding.
Men have, as it were, a calling to use their reason socially and to make
use of it. Just so too the temporal goods of this life.
From this it follows naturally that everyone who has the principium of
conceit, that the judgments of others are for him utterly dispensable in the
use of his own reason and for the cognition of truth, thinks in a very bad
and blameworthy way.
This is actually logical egoism, however, which of course could not and
would not require that one communicate his own judgments to others,
too. This so-called logical egoism consists, then, in nothing but the presumed but often false self-sufficiency of our understanding, existing for
itself and, so to say, isolated, where one believes he knows enough by
himself, and believes he is infallibly correct and incorrigible in all his
judgments.^ And we easily see that this conceited mode of thought* is not
only completely ridiculous but is even most contrary to real humanity.
§ 157
Sensible certainty is to be distinguished by us from certainty of the senses.
Through observations, experiments, and frequent, oft-repeated experience we attain certainty of the senses.
The sensible certainty of a cognition does not really arise, however,
through the actual intuition of objects by means of our senses, but rather
merely through the fact that we make cognitions distinct, convincing, and
capable of insight more easily or with less effort.
A cognition can properly be called rational in two ways, namely, 152
ist "insofar as one can have insight into it through reason and it also agrees
with reason[;] all true[,] well-grounded, provable propositions are of this
kind. Or"
2nd "insofar as it arises merely from reason[;] in most cases all logical cognitions
are of this kind, and on this account they can also be called precise and, in
the most proper sense, cognitions of reason."
In the case of the certainty of a cognition, one can look either to its
logical certainty and certainty of reason or to its aesthetic and sensible
certainty.
Reading "Rechte und der" for "Rechte der," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
' Reading "in allen seinen Urtheilen" for "alle seine Urtheile," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"diese Einbilderische Denckungs Art."
119
The latter cognition is admittedly subject to many errors, but on the
other hand it is also quite easy to have insight into it.
§158
A cognition that is perfect according to the rules of coordinate concepts is
called, in the common manner of speaking, complete. Although one could
rather and more correctly call it an extensive cognition, because coordinate concepts are put forth simultaneously, and are thus, so to speak, as it
were, extended over the object.
§ 159
Those grounds to which other grounds are subordinate are really not at all
the complements of these latter with respect to the sufficient ground;
rather, they are their origin. In the series of grounds coordinate with one
another, however, one concept is of course frequently a complementum of
another.
In the case of the highest degree of certainty of reason I look to the
series of marks subordinate to one another, in order to get to the first
ground. In this way I seek to discover intensive clarity of conviction. In the
case of the highest degree of sensible certainty, however, I always look to
the series of marks coordinate with one another, in order to be able to
produce a certain strict and accurate completeness according to the rules
of extensive clarity.
153 § 161
A cognition can always be certain, however,
1. mathematically but also
2. philosophically.
The peculiar thing about mathematical certainty is that although it
arises from reason, just as the philosophical does, one nonetheless [proceeds] synthetically in it, that is, in the series of marks subordinate to one
another one ascends from the lowest and simplest to the highest.
In philosophical certainty, on the other hand, one goes through the series
of concepts that are subordinate' to one another, to be sure, but this does
not take place syntheticallybut rather analytically."1 And one descends from
the composite and highest concept to the simplest and lowest.
The mathematical certainty of cognition is always very distinct and
"subordinirten d.i.untergeordneten."
"Analytisch, d.i. vermittlest der Zergliederung."
120
intuitive, so that one can have insight into it very easily. But this arises
because all mathematical concepts are synthetic and arise through arbitrary composition. For one can most easily be conscious ofthat which one
has oneself invented. In philosophy, on the other hand, all concepts are
analytic, they are not arbitrary, as in mathematics, so that one can accept
and establish something according to one's own liking[;] instead they are
already given confusedly, and only through philosophy are they to be
made distinct and easy.
Since the concepts in philosophy are already given, then, the philosopher cannot so easily be certain that he has touched on all the marks that
belong to a thing, and that he has insight into these completely perfectly.
Instead, many notae may still belong to the thing, of which he knows
nothing.
None of the marks of a thing can escape or slip away from the mathematician, however, nothing can evade his sharp eye. For he has himself
arbitrarily assumed 'them, if not invented them, and has arbitrarily ascribed them to it[;] consequently he must of course be perfectly conscious
of them all.
§ 167 154
The author speaks in this paragraphs, of shallow cognitions.
In our language, and with our expressions, we quite frequently draw
upon analogies.
We make use, namely, of certain images, in order, by their means, to
give sensibility to cognitions that are in themselves abstract.
In just the same way, here in logic we also call certain cognitions (as
well as modes of understanding, expositions, etc., etc.) shallow, ad analogiam with water.
According to physical principles, a body of water is called shallow, as is
known, when its depths are to be found not far beneath the surface.
A cognition is shallow ad analogiam, then, when it is grounded on mere
experiences and not on any investigation.
Thoroughness of cognition is opposed to, or contradistinguished from, its
shallowness[;] the former is, namely, the terminus^ of certainty.
A cognition is superficielF, however, when one contents oneself with
mere illusion, i.e., when one is content and satisfied with the cognition
that one has acquired with the very first glance at it. With a superficial
cognition, then, one cognizes nothing more than what strikes one's eyes at
once[,] immediately. Thus one has, e.g., a superficial cognition of geography when one is able to do nothing more than to enumerate the names of
the countries, cities, rivers, etc. Thus one has a superficial cognition of
history, if one knows a few striking historical facts about states, without
looking to their origin.
121
Through and by means of a superficial cognition one sees, so to speak,
the debris" swimming on the surface of the water, but one is not aware of
the pearls that lie at the bottom of the sea.
Superficial cognitions, which are concerned only with the surface of a
thing and with cognitions of [that surface], are most closely related to
shallowness.
A cognition is thorough, on the other hand, when one gets to its ground,
i.e., when one goes just as far as one can go in order to attain complete
certainty.
155 A cognition must be deep to be thorough. If the series of grounds
subordinate to one another is very long before one reaches complete
certainty, then the cognition is profound.
All cognitions, the empirical as well as the rational, can become thorough.
Thorough empirical cognitions, cognitions of experience, however, are
not the kind that can become profound, only the rational ones are. The
ground of this is that with empirical cognitions, there is not a series of
subordinate, but only of coordinate, grounds.
Empirical cognitions are thorough, however, when they contain as
many coordinate concepts as are necessary for distinctness.
One has a thorough historical cognition, e.g., when one goes back to
the autores who first wrote about a thing.
A cognition can be thorough even if it is very limited in respect of
extensiveness." But thorough cognitions must alwaysbe preferred to extensivef cognition.
Extensiveness, namely, without profundity is nothing but an empty
shadow[;] it is like a naught, or zero, a cipher, in which there is no real
being.
§ 168
Here the author speaks of three different kinds of actions that we must
undertake in order to be certain of a cognition or to reject it. These 3
actions are, namely, nothing but our different procedures in regard to the
approval that we believe we owe or do not owe to those cognitions, as
there is
ist the giving of approval
2nd the withdrawal of approval, and
3rd the withholding of approval.
' "dieStoppeln."
' "Weitläuftigkeit, und Ausbreitung."
* "ausgebreiteten, und weitläuftigen."
122
The first is a positive action,
the second aprivative
the third, however, is no action at all.
In the first case, namely, I take something to be true
In the second case I accept something to befalse 156
In the third case, however, I do notjudge at all, but rather I suspend* my
judicium.
With every cognition we can think either of a
plus
or of a minus, or of a
zero.
Affirmative judgments increase our cognitions, and thus are a plus[.]
Negative judgments do not increase our cognition, and thus are a minus.
For they only seek to lessen the false in our cognitions, to put us in a
position not to accept anything but what is true[;] in short, they only serve
to avoid error[.]
But when in any cognition, finally, we neither affirm something nor
deny it, then this is the condition of zero.
Just as in respect of our external humorr we are in the condition of plus
when we are pleased, in the condition of minus when we are sad, and in
the condition of zero when we are completely indifferent or insensible.
The withdrawal of approval adds nothing to our cognitions, of course,
but it nonetheless restrains us from error.
When we give a cognition our approval, however, then our knowledge
receives an accrementum[.]s
The withholding of approval, however, brings about uncertainty. Although it can be rather useful in many cases. But here we must necessarily
discuss the following questions. Namely, whether our free choice has an
influence on whether we give our approval to a cognition, or withdraw it
from it, or whether we even withhold it.
Answer[.} In most cases, such a procedure of giving our approval, or
withdrawing it, or holding it backf,] does not rest at all on our free choice,
but rather is necessitated through and by the laws of our understanding
and our reason.
Thus it happens in mathematica, for example. A businessman, e.g., who 157
sees from his bills that he owes much, and more than he has to hope for
and possesses, will of course not be able to withdraw his approval' from
this cognition, which is so evident, however much he might like to[;] even
assuming he does not regard [the cognition] especially positive^, he will
"Suspendire."
"unseres äußeren Humeurs."
accretion, growth.
"Beyfall, und Consens."
123
nonetheless not be able to to regard the sum of the debt negativeL[,] as
available, existing capital, since he is too much and too evidently convinced of the correctness of the arithmetic in this matter, and the account
of the debts contains far too much evidence.
This much is certain, if we were in a position and if we were disposed to
give our approval, now to accept something at will, arbitrarily,or also now
to reject it, then we would thus be placed in a position to further, to
produce, and to increase our pleasure, our comfort, indeed, even our
happiness.
On the other hand, we would also be capable, to just that degree, of
removing arbitrarily whatever could bring us sadness and cause us irritation. But then, with such arbitrary cognitions, either there would have to
be no sufficient grounds to maintain their opposite, or, assuming these
were present, then we would have to be under no necessity of reflecting
on them. In this way the debtor would easily be able to consider himself a
creditor, someone who has been dismissed would be able to consider
himself his prince's darling, etc., he who receives the saddest news would
be able to consider himself happy, or at least to remain in suspenso (although, considered from another side, suspension between fear and hope
is far more difficult and more terrifying, even more unbearable, than the
consciousness of his misfortune) [;] and even when the complete ruin of
his position, his honor, etc., and of all his means lay before him inescapably and in the near future, nevertheless [he would] always be in a position, with his soul content and his mind undisturbed or excited, to be able
to sleep well and peacefully, and to eat and drink well.
This free arbitrium in regard to approval might perhaps be included
among the happinesses of the ancient poets, however. It disappears en-
158 tirely, and in the presence of certain degrees of the grounds it is always
very hard, if not utterly impossible, to withhold one's approval.
Hence in very many cases one can not only count on the approval that
someone must give to someone else, but one can even demand it, that is,
one can wring and force it from him.
The mathematician, whose propositions display themselves with sufficient grounds and are proved, can always speak authoritatively[;] he can
with right demand of me my approval for his propositions^] and he who in
spite of this wishes to remain in suspenso and always to doubt whether he
should accept these propositions, etc., or on the other hand reject them,
will always make himself ridiculous and show that he does not know at all
what mathematics and its properties are.
In spite of this, however, although approval does not depend" immediate^ on men's choice, it nevertheless often does depend on it indirecte,
"abhängt, oder dependiret."
124
mediately," since it is according to one's free wish0" that he seeks out those
grounds that could in any way bring about approval for this or that cognition, which cannot demand the consensus aliorum debitum*
If approval does not arise immediately through the nature of the human
understanding and of human reason, then it still requires closer direction
of choice, will, wish, or in general of our free will, toward the grounds of
proof.
It is certain, of course, that in the human soul there occurs an arbitrary
direction of the powers of the mind toward what we would like to see and
what we wish for.
We give our approval at once to a cognition that is agreeable and
pleasant to us, without even taking the trouble to investigate more closely
the proper, true grounds for taking it to be true.
If something is very weighty for us and of very great importance, so that
a great part, indeed, even the greatest part of our peace of mind and of our
external well-being and happiness depends upon it, then in this case the
mind is just not free enough to consider the matter indifferently and
impartially from both sides, to weigh grounds for it on one side and the
grounds for its opposite on the other side, to hold the importance of all 159
these various grounds up against one another properly, and to pronounce
on their advantage; instead the mind, and often even our understanding,
are chained, as it were, and restricted, so that we immediately and readily
approve what is advantageous to us and grant it our approval. And, on the
other hand, [we] soon reject and disapprove what could cause us harm or
sickness.
In the suspensio judicii, finally, that is, in the withholding of our approval,
one really undertakes no action whatsoever, as we mentioned above.
A judgment is dogmatic when one either in fact accepts or affirms a
cognition that has been put forth, or on the other side rejects and denies
it. But when, on the contrary, one does not make a judgment, but rather
withholds it, and hence neither affirms something nor denies something,
then this judgment is skeptical.
The skeptical in judging, where one does not make any decision[,] does
not settle anything, but instead leaves everything unsettled, and entertains
doubts about everything concerning which one cannot maintain anything
with certainty, until one has suitable grounds of proof either for accepting
it or for rejecting it. This cautious^ and careful procedure in judging,
where one is very much on one's guard against affirming something of
which one is not wholly reliably convinced, and against denying anything
"'mittelbahr, mediate."
"nach seinem freyen Belieben."
agreement of others that is owed.
"caute."
125
into whose impossibility or not being one does not have fully distinct
insight —this procedure is actually most adequate and most advantageous
for distinct truth. Provided only that one does not have the constant
resolve to doubt everything forever, and to leave everything undecided.
Thus it happens that a true philosopher is quite inclined not to waste his
approval unnecessarily on just anything, but rather always to withhold it
until he has enough and fully sufficient grounds of truth. But just as soon
as he has sufficient grounds for the truth of a cognition, and apprehends
their validity himself, he asks nothing more, but rather his custom is to
subscribe to the cognition at once, and to cognize it as true, indeed, to
maintain it.
The insatiable desire that prevails among many so-called philosophers
or dogmatists to decide every cognition - that is, to accept or to reject -
160 immediately[,] at first glance[,] without the slightest investigation[,] has
seduced some and is always the surest way to infinite errors.
One of the most outstanding causes, however, that very frequently
misleads man into making a false judgment, or even into an error, is the
affects*
These perverters" of man, which in common life produce so much
disorder, are in no less a position to confuse man's understanding and to
lead it into errors. Now these affects of man direct the grounds of certainty concerning a thing solely to one side, and they do not allow him to
consider the other side as well. Thus we can of course blame someone
who has given approval to a false cognition, namely, when the responsibility actually lies with him for rejecting those grounds that could have
convinced him of the object of the cognition he has, and could have freed
him from his error.
Only mathematics and pure and immediate experience are of such a
kind that they leave us no grounds for their opposite.
All of our other 'cognitions, on the other hand, are of such a kind that
they quite frequently offer us grounds of proof for maintaining the opposite of a thing that are just as great as the grounds of proofs for accepting
the thing. It is certainly really prudent, therefore, to know how to withhold
one's approval in most cases, until one has enough grounds for the thing.
Deception is universal in almost all things, therefore this is in fact an
actually certain path, indeed, in many cases an infallible one, for avoiding
many illusions of reason and for dispensing with error. Nevertheless, this
withholding of approval must of course not be such that one is inclined at
the same time never to let himself be convinced of the thing and always to
refuse it his approval[;] for in this way we never decide anything, so we
remain ignorant in all things.
z "die afficten."
° "verkehrer."
126
The withholding of approval, namely, with the mentioned inclination
never to decide anything, is really nothing but a lazy doubt, a lazy addiction to doubt,* or at least the path thereto.
Suspensio should only help [one] not to accept something until one has 161
enough grounds, but not on this account to reject every hope at all of
being able to attain full certainty concerning a thing or a cognition.
Reflecting is distinct from investigating and investigation.
To reflect is to compare something with the laws of the understanding. To .
investigate, however, is actually to reflect mediately. Concerning many
things we can quite well cognize without investigation what is true, what
false. But reflection, on the other hand, is always necessary for any judgment, and for the distinction of the true from the false, even if it be in
general, or in a [particular] cognition, etc., in all cases indispensable.
§ 169
The word praejudicium has a double or twofold meaning, namely,
ist it means a provisional judgment, which is, however, not an actual prejudice
at all.
2nd It means an actual judgment. E.g., if one prizes one man's writings much
higher than another's, before one has even seen them, then this is not a real
prejudice but rather only a provisional judgment, since reason infers something from certain grounds.
Here reason does not really decide anything, then, but rather it only
judges from those few grounds that it has of the thing[;] it thinks in
accordance with these grounds, represents something.
This judgment is not at all dogmatic, then; rather, it is just always
combined with a certain postponement.
This provisional judgment is not a ground, namely, for taking something to be certain, not even in the least. In the meantime, however, this
much is certain, that in the present condition more grounds are available
for the acceptance of the thing than for its rejection and for maintaining
the opposite of this thing. Therefore one readily praises a book that is
supposed to come from a learned, famous, and well-known man, even
before one has read it oneself, merely because one represents to oneself
that in accordance with his reputation, a very famous man has to write 162
worthy things, hence this book will also be well written.
There has never been an inventor in the world, and there has never
been anyone who invented something, who did not at the same time make
a provisional judgment concerning his invention and the invented thing.
He was not certain of the thing, but the judgment cleared the path for him
to try, and to experiment. E.g., miners judge from strata in the earth where
* "eine faule Zweifelsucht."
127
they are to find metals, and they make suppositions until they have gotten
certain cognitions' concerning the mines, cognitions which no longer
deceive them and in consequence of which they reach'' their end.
Cognitions arise in us, however, either through cognition of the object
or through and by means of properties that belong to the subject, that is[,]
subjective grounds of cognition.
A subjective ground of holding-to-be-true prior to all reflection, as the
ground of the action of the understanding that is necessary for this and,
moreover, useful, can be called prejudice.
Inclination is a disposition of the mind to love something and to be taken
with it.
The inclinations are very seductive; to overpower them constantly is
certainly the greatest art, indeed, is almost impossible, and so is it in logic,
too, with the argumentis ab utili' and with the argumentis ab odio/And this
happens especially, of course, when this or that thing gets entangled with
an interest of men, close or wide-ranging, universal or particular, and thus
has a special involvement with that interest.
The prejudices that arise from inclination are various.
A further subjective ground of holding-to-be-true is imitation, too,
toward which man is accordingly by nature quite inclinedf;] and the judgments that arise from this stretch out across man's whole life.
Of all the things that can only harm and be opposed to the philosophical
spirit, the spirit of imitation is always actually the worst. Imitation is the
cultivation of one's understanding, his will, indeed, of his choice, according to the example* of others; if, namely, one is not skilled in thinking for
oneself, then one takes refuge in others and copies from them completely
163 faithfully, as the painter copies the original, except that this portrayal is
frequently quite unfitting, indeed, comical.
One thing, then, is quite often opposed to that spirit of holding cognitions to be true that does not want to err, [namely,] custom, which often
opposes the understanding, but is difficult to destroy once it has taken
root.
Those people who blindly mix up a provisional judgment with a decisive judgment are in far too much a hurry. Thus a certain suspensio judicii
is very necessary and useful here, so that one does not hurry too much.
This suspensio teaches us, namely, how we ought to regard grounds that
are plausible but by no means sufficient, ones that we do not at all take to
be convincing[;] and consequently in many cases it keeps us from many
wrong turns and errors in cognitions.
' "Kenntniße."
* Reading "erreichen" instead of "nicht erreichen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxi).
' argument based onusefulness.
^ argument based on hatred.
* "nach dem Beyspiel, und Exempel."
128
The very dangerous enemy of men, of which we spoke above, is one of
the greatest causes of over-excitement.h A calm man who is not disturbed,
confused, excited, etc., by any strong movement of the mind will not hurry
at once, and not as easily as one who has an affect' and is unstoppably
driven on by it.
Reflection is, however, an important[,] very great and certain path, if
not for extinguishing the affects, nevertheless for quieting them, for hindering their dangerous consequences, and thus for avoiding errors. By
reflecting one allows and takes time to investigate, and in fact to inquire,
whether something is true or false or not, whether one can accept the
opposite of it or not. And by this path, where one reflects on the thing
peacefully, one is even soon convinced of the truth of a thing or cognition.
Philosophy likewise strives to restrain the affects as much as possible
and to root them out. Hence really learned people, and philosophers, can
keep a tight rein on their affects, so that they are not easily taken by a thing
without first having sufficient grounds.
Instead they weigh everything that they take as objectum of their considerations cold-bloodedly, that is, with calm mind[;] furthermore, they carefully consider in everything one side as well as the other, and in this way
they arrive best, most easily, and most certainly at a proper cognition of
the true.
By means of provisional judgments we seek to assist ourselves toward 164
closer investigation[;p we judge, however, before we have considered and
cognized the thing more closely.
One does not hit upon the truth without seeking it, but even without
seeking it one must make judgments concerning the path by which he
thinks he will hit upon it.
We do not attain complete certainty except by means of investigation;
but any investigation must still be preceded by a provisional judgment.
Between a provisional judgment and prejudice only a small distinction
appears to exist and to be actual, in that both judgments are judgments
that always precede the investigation of a thing or of a cognition.
Provisional judgment, however, as a means to investigation, connected
with consciousness and with the resolve thereby to hit upon the path to
investigation, is not only most highly suited for our understanding, but is
also a certain, indeed, infallible path for attaining the truth of a cognition.
No important invention, none of weight, has actually occurred without
this.
But when one judges and accepts something before investigation, with
the resolve not to undertake any closer investigation concerning the whole
"überhitzung."
' "im Affect ist."
' Reading "Untersuchung" for"Ueberzeugung."
129
thing, but rather to rest completely content with it, then this is in fact a
punishable prejudice, which not only does not further the cognition of
truth but even actually hinders and harms it.
The former judgment, namely, a cautious,* provisional judgment, but
with the resolve to investigate the cognition more closely in order to attain
the truth, is thus actually useful to truth, and subsequently it directs
investigation, too, which one then undertakes concerning the cognition.
The essential thing in all prejudices, however, is that they are universal
rules for judging.
It is not a prejudice, however, when one accepts a proposition without
extensive investigation^] rather, one accepts this proposition through a
prejudice. Hence we have two conditions and special properties of the
human understanding:
165 ist Tohave a prejudice, or to be occupied with one, and then
2nd not to have a prejudice, but rather to accept something through prejudice.
Almost everyone, be he who he may, esteems the fashions and customs
of his country or his fatherland as the best and most proper. Among us,
e.g., we bare our heads, but not so among the Turks[;] therefore we
consider them crude, although it is not yet settled whether it is crudeness
to cover one's head or to bare it. The Turks, again, perhaps consider us
impolite. But this is actually not a prejudice, but rather only something
that is accepted through prejudice.
Prejudices are not grounded on reflection. They lack this, for otherwise
they would be actual judgments of the understanding.
Reflection, of which we have already spoken above, is nothing but the
comparison of a cognition with the laws of the understanding and of
reason. We are not directed merely by the laws of the understanding and
of reason, however, but quite frequently also by the inclinations, or by our
taste. In the case of the inclinations, no reflection at all occurs.
Prejudices, however, have very many sources, and varied ones.
Custom is likewise one of the causes and grounds of judging without
reflection. Without having an inclination to something, one nevertheless
quite often takes it to be true merely out of custom. Hence if one wants to
cleanse someone of his errors, one must not only convince him of the
opposite of what he believes, but also slowly and bit by bit[,] with timef,]
accustom him to it, and give him time to accept the truth. Even with the
most convincing, most evident, and most certain proofs, he who had long
been suspended in error and had been taken with doubt will not be
capable of being won over immediately and all at once, and thus convinced, and completely overcome by the irrefutability of the proofs, so that
he immediately dismisses all doubt and would decide and be disposed to
* "cautes."
130
accept the truth at once without resistance[;] rather, this quite frequendy
requires a long time.
There are the following 3 sources of prejudices, however, which are the
most common and the greatest[:]
1. imitation 166
2. custom
3. inclination.
In youdi one does not yet have any skill in judging, hence one allows
oneself to be driven by imitation, and one quickly accepts as certain and
undoubted what is maintained by others, in whom we either place a
particular trust or who have particular prestige with us, or what die universal votum of many prescribes for us.
Now if in addition to this imitation we add the custom of judging thus
and not otherwise, then this prejudice becomes all the stronger and gains
ever more power.
A child, e.g., certainly always accepts as the greatest and most important truths the first impressions dial occur to its mind, in most cases quite
easily[;] indeed, it also even retains these the longest.
In accordance with the given rules[,] the laws of the imagination, such
prejudices are of course not easy to dislodge from the soul once diey have
taken root in it.
No reflection at all really occurs here, dien, but rather one accepts at
once what others have maintained before us, without oneself reflecting on
whether or not it is rational to accept it.
Thus it happens that when children in their tender youth are taught
false concepts, images, representations, etc., these latter cannot be uprooted from their imagination^]' and thus one has great cause to proceed
very carefully and to take care that one does not prematurely spoil children's understanding, and in a certain way render it useless.
Furthermore, custom is, as it were, a very fertile source of many ruinous prejudices. When one has frequendy performed an action, has had
good experience with it and thus has accustomed himself to it, there
finally arises from this in the course of time a certain kind of necessity to
act thus and, indeed, not to proceed otherwise.
To clothe oneself fashionably (but according to one's social position,
nonetheless) is laudable and good, for it is more acceptable and better to
be a fool in fashion than out of it. But to judge, to infer, to think, to write, 167
as it were, in accordance witii die fashion, is always silly and a proof of no
reflection at all. Ceremonies, modes of dressing, compliments may be
brought under fashion, but not the understanding.
Inclination is also a cause and ground of some judgments, furtiiermore,
"Imagination, oder Einbildungskraft."
131
and in this case, to be sure, one judges and infers that something is good,
acceptable, and perfect because it excites us, because it stimulates us and
suits our taste.
Still more, inclination occasions us always to undertake examinations
and investigations only from one side, and of course only from the side
where we wish that it were so and not otherwise, and thus it occasions us
to leave the other side, which might perhaps provide us with grounds for
the opposite, completely uninvestigated. We even seek to find grounds
with whose help we can refute™ the opposite of what we wish. Here,
likewise, the laws of the understanding and of reason are, as it were,
absent and not at home[;] there is simplyno reflection, and instead certain
sensations simply occur.
All prejudices arise from imitation, custom, or inclination, and without
these three sources no prejudices, which are very frequently such obstacles to truth, would ever occur in the world.
Everything that is immediately certain needs no investigation. All cognitions must be reflected upon, that is, they must be compared with the laws
of the understanding and of reason and held up against one another. But
not all cognitions need to be investigated, for to investigate is nothing other
than to compare something mediatelywith the laws of the understanding
and of reason.
All cognitions whose agreement with the laws of our understanding and
reason occurs immediately are indemonstrable; these can be accepted
without investigation, they need not be proved, indeed, one cannot even
undertake an investigation of them.
In the proper sense, one is not in a position to do this. A prejudice,
however, is nothing but a certain universalground for judgingwithout any
reflection.
But a cognition that is accepted merelyby means of a prejudice is not at
all a prejudice itself; if we want to speak properly, we must understand
168 that there are actually only a few prejudices, but on the other hand
infinitely many errors arising from these existing prejudices.
A prejudice alwaysarises when one judgeswithout reflection,i.e., when
one judges concerning a thing or its cognition without previously having
compared this cognition with the laws of the understanding or of reason.
Prejudices cannot properly lie in defects or mistakes of our understanding
and our reason, then, but must arise instead from other powers.
The understanding and reason themselves, left to themselves, never
err[;] this much is settled without doubt and is certain, for this would be
an evident contmdictio in adjecto, as we" have already remarked above[;]
they would have to be in opposition to their own powers, and yet no power
" Reading "widerlegen" for "darthun."
" Reading "wie wir" for "wir wir."
132
can oppose itself[;] rather, it comes from the fact that other, foreign
powers mingle with the powers and laws of our understanding and of
reason, from which arises a mixed effect[;] and thence an error naturally
arises.
First of all, prejudice cannot possibly arise, and cannot correct itself,
based on the laws of the understanding, for it is a judgment without
reflection. That which is accepted by means of a prejudice, however, is
not yet on that account always false as to its matter.
But prejudices, furthermore, are just not wholly necessary sources of
errors[;] but this much is still certain, that every cognition that is accepted
through a prejudice is always false in itself as to form.
Frequently a certain intended end can of course be attained through a
cognition, but the method of attaining this end may often not be the
genuine or proper one. And thus it happens quite frequently with the
actions of men.
Any man at all, if only he wants, can revenge himself on one who has
insulted him too much," that is, on his enemy, and make him pay for the
injustice he has done[;] but the way of revenging oneself, and the form of
avenging oneself, are unjust and not allowed: One ought not to be one's
own judge. He on whom one revenges oneself cannot complain in the
least, no injustice at all has happened to him, but rather one has merely
paid him in like coin.
But this is just not the suitable manner of avengingoneself on someone. 169
From this there would only arise such great disorder that finally it would
almost be irremediable. Instead, divine and human laws prescribe for us
the legitimate way to attain compensation for our injury, our honor, etc.,
without having to shame ourselves by the way in which we attain it.
It happens thus with prejudice, too. That judgment and the cognition
can very often be quite true in respect of the object, but not in respect of
form.
One must therefore take good care not to reject immediately all prejudices whatever, but instead one must test them first and investigate well
whether there may not yet be something good to be found in them. Again,
one can actually find a kind of prejudice against prejudices, namely, when
one immediately rejects everything that has arisen through prejudices.
In this way one can quite frequently reject the greatest and most important truths, and innocently rob oneself of those that are capable oP and
ripe for investigation and research. As, e.g., when one accepts what all
men say and always takes this to be completely certain, this is a prejudice.
But now it is really the case that very many truths rest merely on what men
"der ihn beleidiget, oder zuviel gebotten hat."
f Reading "welche der Untersuchung" for "welche nicht der Untersuchung," with Hinske
(KI, Ixxiü).
133
say,
1
and that they have and can have no other ground, but nevertheless on
closer investigation they really are certain truths.
Now if one wanted to reject all these truths straight away, many men
who do not have enough capacity and enough strength of mind to investigate everything according to the laws of the understanding and of reason
and to examine it with proper reflection would thereby be robbed of very
good cognitions.
There are some men who are of the kind that their mind is an enemy of
what is true, and that such prejudices thus take root among them first of
all and most easily, men who seek to cast suspicion on every truth diat is
assured and firmly and earnestly maintained by others.
Without any doubt, a great many useless prejudices are to be found [.]
But is our procedure reasonable and legitimate if, merely on account of
170 the fact that a prejudice is perhaps useful, beneficial, or just not harmful
to someone else, we therefore do not merely fail to smother the prejudice
in him, but instead generate, produce, maintain, and multiply it? This is
another and completely different question. This is really a kind of deceit
and a breach of faith and honesty to generate and to sustain prejudices in
others because they are useful in this or that case.
A prejudice considered by itself can in itself provide something useful,
of course, but in spite of this such methods, which one applies in order to
provide, or to try to produce, something useful by their means, are not
right, not allowed.
Nonetheless, however, it still remains true that it would be an obvious
impertinence if one wished to rob someone - who has a prejudice that is
either not completely harmful to him, or is even in certain respects useful
and advantageous - of that prejudice by a manner of deceit and thus put
him in distress and confusion.
But to strengthen a prejudice in someone is just as objectionable[;] as,
e.g., when one proceeds irresponsibly in instruction in morals, it is just
like this when one makes use of an often superstitious error in order to
restrain man from one or another vice, in order to restrain him from it and
to frighten him off. That is the so-called frauspia.'
Everything true, however, that is produced by means of one or another
prejudice, is false formaliter, although it can be and is correct materialiter.
How miserable is the education that seeks to ground true moral rules in
youths through prejudices and errors.
Many prejudices are such and of the kind that if one dared to attack
them, to extinguish them, to try to clear them away, they would nonetheless make die mind of man all the more embittered, indeed, would deafen
* "auf der Sage der Menschen."
f pious deception.
134
man to listening and attending to true doctrines and important dogmataL,
which have great consequences for them.
There actually are quite comfortable prejudices, with which man is
quite at ease, and it would therefore be great folly to deprive someone else
of such prejudices, which would be, and often actually are, in a position to
contribute so very much to his well-being. 171
The case is otherwise, however, with harmful prejudices, which can
frequently have influence not just on an individual case or man but even
on the welfare of a whole republic. These one can and must always strive
to root out as much as possible with the greatest industry, because one is
thus nots harmful to him who has this prejudice, and helps and is useful to
others, indeed, a great multitude of people.
Thus we must not be suspicious of other men, even when they are quite
filled with prejudices, be it with or without their responsibility.
The common man has and preserves very many prejudices, to which he
very often holds quite stubbornly; but it is also just as certain that the
learned man, even the greatest, has just as many of them, and far more
dangerous ones. This latter sometimes holds to his canones just as much as
any other, and he does not leave them, as the common man does not leave
the proverbs he has inherited from his forefathers and has confirmed
through long experience. Only there is this difference, that in the case of a
learned man the prejudices are disguised under the name of canones, but
with the latter[,] with the common man[,] they are disguised under the
name of proverbs.
§ i?o
The author here distinguishes prejudices from one another. He calls
some prejudices logical.Just as if he had it in mind to indicate thereby that
there are other kinds of prejudices that are not logical.
Usually it is the aesthetical that is contradistinguished from the logical,
and therefore prejudices will be and be able to be divided into
1. logical, and
2. aesthetic prejudices.
The former consist in the fact that, and occur when, our cognitions are
contrary to the rules of the understanding and of reason[;] the latter, on
the other hand, consist in the fact that our cognitions are contrary to the
rules of taste.
Fashion is actually nothing but a prejudice of taste, in accordance with 172
which, through a prejudice, one takes something to be beautiful or ugly.
Fashion is thus the source of aesthetic prejudices. Fashions make one
* Reading "nicht schädlich" for "schädlich."
135
represent to himself that some inner beauty or other resides in this or that
kind of clothing or of dress[;] thus one thinks and also judges according to
the rules of taste.
Imitation and custom are the greatest sources of aesthetic prejudices.
Frequent approval of one or another object makes, as it were, an archetype in the soul, with which one is in no position to compare other things
that look otherwise than this original which has been established and
which, as a model, is incapable of improvement.
If everyone wanted to clothe himself according to his own pleasure and
taste, we would finally have the most splendid kinds of clothing[;] now,
however, proper taste in clothing is really lacking, and just for the reason
that in this matter fashion reigns, which everyone follows incessantly and
constantly.
All fashion in general is harmful rather than useful, for it is opposed to
the rules of pure reason as well as to the rules of taste. And he who is or
wants to be fashionable in his judgments of taste, or even of reason,
certainly has no reason. He thereby shows his very poor talents and his
complete lack of all taste. Nevertheless, it is more acceptable to be fashionable in taste than to be fashionable in thinking, judging, and in sentiments^;
to be fashionable in clothing is acceptable and often good. But to be
fashionable in sentiments? is actual, logical prejudice. Prejudice of taste
reigns not only in clothing but also even in style.
Almost every century has a style or form of its own[.]
In writing style, what prevails is sometimes a great pomp of inflated
words. Sometimes timid contortions of wit prevail, sometimes again a
completely shallow writing style prevails, which people like to call natural
because it is easy, costs little or no effort, and can be produced without art.
173 Sometimes, again, people love in all things a writing style such as one had
been accustomed to use in letters. Sometimes, again, people love above all
a heavy, dark, puzzling, enigmatic writing style, which they prefer to a
light, complete, distinct style, which is supposed to reveal a certain profundity and the author's deep-thinking learnedness because one must ponder
over it a long time and one has, as it were, a puzzle to solve before one
comes to figure out what the author meant by this, to be able to discover
the author's real sense and meaning, and to find what the author thought.
Taste is quite ruined by imitation, a fertile source' of all prejudices,
since one borrows everything, thinks nothing of a beauty that one might
be able to invent and come up with oneself, as [compared to] what others
have already thought up and have previously cognized, and what is considered beauty by these people.
If, therefore, everyone wanted to try, not so much always to imitate, but
' Reading "Nachahmung, eine ergiebige Quelle" for "Nachahmung einer ergiebigen
Quelle," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
136
rather to be an original himself, then we would certainly soon see the
greatest geniuses, who would be sublime and great in judgments of taste.
Just in the same way, again, there are various kinds of prejudices in
various fine arts and belles lettres," as, e.g., in music, in poetry, in painting, in statuary, etc. Everywhere!,] in every taste[,] prejudices always prevail, even, indeed, in moral taste.
Custom and examples make this happen and are therefore the causes of
the fact that in these things so many prejudices, so many fashions, reign.
It has been noted that the English nation has more numerous and
greater originals than the French and other nations. This actually derives,
however, from the freer and less constrained form of government. For
there almost every one is his own master, at least of his own genius. In
most cases he naturally thinks, judges, and acts without being moved by
examples, or at least without directing himself according to them, following them, imitating them. Everyone thinks, then, and judges the same
thing according to his taste, and therefore there are so few copies there.
On the other hand, though, countries, states, in which a monarchical
form of government is introduced and prevails are not in a position to 174
produce any such originalia, or at least not nearly as many, for here people
are commonly guided very much by examples, which often become norms
in thinking, in action, and in judging[;] and in fact customarily the magnates of the empire, those who are great in the empire and at court, are in
most cases the originalia, the models, according to which men usually seek
to shape themselves, and to imitate them.
Here the author divides prejudices further into prejudices (i.) of excessive trust, and (2.) of excessive mistrust[;] but both kinds of prejudices are in
fact the same and are inseparably bound up with one another and united.
The cause of prejudices of excessive trust, however, is really nothing
but the desire to extend one's cognitions, but without discernment and
true judgment ofthat with which one wants to enrich them[.] And industrious observation teaches, to be sure, how this happens in most cases
among the youth, while age, on the other hand, as that which has more
experience and more cognitions than youth and has also suffered more
delusions, frequently reflects more and examines whether it is worthwhile, and whether it is worth the effort, to strive for the attainment of this
or that cognition, and whether this is correct or not. And due to these
fluctuations" and this frequently repeated doubt, [age] frequently falls
prey to the prejudice of excessive mistrust[;] and in most cases it also
comes about that the older we gradually become, the more faint-hearted
and mistrustful we become then, too.
"in verschiedenenschönen Künsten und Wißenschaften."
"dieses hin und herdenckens."
137
In the prejudice of excessive trust," however, we give to a few persons a
certain superiority over ourselves, [and] we must therefore attribute to
them more cleverness, more learnedness, etc., than to ourselves[;] and we
choose them as originals, in accordance with which we strive to form
ourselves/
People of high rank are in most cases of the kind that one is influenced
by very many prejudices toward them in respect of their skills and attributes. One constantly takes them to be clever, learned, sublime, nobleminded, etc. Even clothing often makes [one] learned and clever; even a
person in uniform awakens respect[;] he appears at once to possess more
understanding than others, although he very frequently sits in the greatest
shadows of darkness.
175 What a man of high rank says is frequently noticed, rather than what a
common or poor man produces. Although the latter is quite often cleverer
than the former. Furthermore, there is a prejudice of excessive multitude^
where one accepts, and persuades oneself, that many persons are more in
a position, and in a better position, to pass judgment on something than
few are. This is the common and lowest prejudice of prestige.
Therefore some are frightened when for the first time they are supposed to give a public speech, lecture, etc., before a large assembly. The
same person would perhaps not be frightened to speak before 2 or 3
persons, but before a few 1000 one is afraid. One judges, namely, that
what finds approval among all is true and must actually be so in the
objeaum itself, although this is frequently quite false.
The prejudice of excessive multitude arises in most cases out of the
prejudice of imitation. A great number of men, who give their attention
only to me, carefully observe only me, must necessarily be a source of awe
to me.
With respect to morality, however, the prejudice of the multitude isvery
harmful, disadvantageous, in fact shameful[;] thus it happens, too, that
man likes to follow the great crowd, even in his actions which have an
influence on morals; he hopes, as it were, to hide himself among the
crowd when he does something evil, and thus to be able to escape unseen
the eye of the eternal, heavenlyjudge.
A like judgment can easily be produced by a great multitude; no one
has the spirit of imitation as much as a great multitude.
Thus when something is such that it acquires the universal approval of
the people at once, just as soon as it appears and at first glance, then it is
always quite often to be feared that it is not good for much; and a rational
man who acquires universal and thoroughgoing approval all at once must
* Reading "Zutrauens" for "Mißtrauens."
* "uns selbst zu bilden."
* "Vorurtheil der gar zu großen Menge."
138
not only actually not rejoice, but must rather be dispirited. Books that are
praised2 just as as soon as they have come to light from the press are
certainly in most cases very shallow.
What is good and in fact excellent, what produces correct but new
truths, commonly finds very great opposition in the beginning, and this
lasts until, after closer examination and investigation[,] after research and 176
discovery of the real properties and of its difference from other cognitions, one discovers its beauties, and what makes it particularly superior to
other writings, and until one begins to prize these highly.
All prejudice of excessive prestige can appropriately be divided into
three kinds, however. - - -
namely,
ist the judgment of excessive prestige that others have with us.
2nd the prejudice of excessive prestige that we have with ourselves.
3rd the prejudice of excessive prestige that a cognition has with us on account
of a few perfections that it brings with it, and from which one infers that still
more perfections must be found in it.
As for what concerns \he first kind of prejudice, we are in most cases
inclined to ascribe more to others than to ourselves, and to trust them
more. We believe that someone else will know better something that we do
not know. This prejudice arises not only from the consciousness of our
own weaknesses, for this is no ground for attributing to others more than
to ourselves, but rather from a certain respect that we have for the whole
human race, since we judge that what we lack will be found in others.
A different prejudice arises from a certain laziness.
Nothing is more comfortable than to imitate and to draw one's cognitions from others. From this prejudice arise the various and sundry citations in books, where one cites the judgments of others and their opinions
of this or that thing, and presents these citationes as proofs.
There is actually a kind of laboriousness involved in this, a diligence,
but no difficulty. One has to work long, although without a certain exertion of one's powers. This prejudice of the excessive prestige that others
have with us caters to the desire for comfort. One need not think oneself,
but instead can rely wholly on the genius, on the understanding of another, and merely imitate others.
Yet another kind of prejudice of prestige toward others arises from 177
vanity. In this way one actually, as it were, subjects himself to others[;] one
makes himself the slave of someone great, and of someone else's understanding and power of judgment. But frequently this happens only in
order to be able to command others, in order to have great mastery over
others, who are still less than we are.
* Reading "Bücher, die gelobt werden, sobald" for "Bücher, die sobald."
139
Nowhere, however, is there greater pomposity, nowhere greater pride,
than in polyhistory. Here, namely, out of ambition and vanity, one elevates
great learned men in order, under this pretence, to be elevated oneself, to
be able to elevate oneself, and, as it were, to elevate oneself far above the
so-called learned crowd. One presents a great, famous learned man to the
eye of the learned world and seeks to persuade all others firmly that they
will always act in vain, irrespective of all the possible industry, work, and
effort they can apply, since they could never be in a position to be equal to
this great man, or to come near to him[;] indeed, since one regards the
sayings of this great archetype as incontrovertible and unimprovable
oracula, one simply rejects all their opinions, merely because they contradict, or seem to contradict, the judgment of the great man. One is afraid
oneself, or seeks to make all others afraid, to try to strive ever to become
equal to this learned man, just as if it would be a vain undertaking to strive
after this.
Just so does it happen, e.g., that most proud people, who do not like to
be subjected to or to obey others, or who envy their fellow citizens one or
another power, most like to have the unrestricted government of a monarch in a state, and they help to promote this, in order to be equal with one
another and not to need to be afraid of any of their fellow citizens[;] and
this is in fact the true origin of all monarchies. There is actually nothing
more harmful for the human race, however, than always to represent
others as unattainable examples, and to take them, as it were, as models
for imitation. One thereby copies more the errors than the good properties of the original that is set up, because everything in the world is
178 imperfect, and thus even these models cannot be fully excluded from this.
The Scriptures themselves say that we ought never to choose as our
model anyone but God, this being that is completely perfect in all respects. Always to direct and form" oneself according to others, and so
according to highly imperfect men like us, brings about more harm than
good.
Such prejudices of prestige and of imitation are much supported by bad
upbringing and inept instruction, namely, when, for confirmation of his
judgments of the understanding, one quotes, cites, and refers to* the
judgments and opinions of others, not one's own reflection or experience.
And although this method, whether in oral or in written expositions, is
very pleasant and is witness to wide reading, nonetheless, it frequently just
grounds the prejudice of prestige.
We have already spoken above of the prejudice of the prestige diat a
great multitude of people has with us. We may suppose that what all
people accept is universally valid. There lies in our nature a certain
" "bilden."
* "allegiret."
140
inclination to communicate our opinion to others, as we indicated above,
so that if someone were in the desert and had to stay there without any
human society, all his judgments would seem to him to be for nothing and
in vain.
This inclination does not arise from vanity at all but rather from human
reason's particular and excellent disposition to communicate/ If one
judges alone, namely, and for oneself, then one is never really certain
whether the judgment does not spring from a certain delusion that could
somehow take us in. We therefore desire to test it on the understanding of
other men and to investigate. Here one makes, as it were, an experiment
and checks whether what we think is universal, whether others accept it,
or whether it is not in agreement with reason. Thus one, so to speak, as it
were, polishes those judgments that one has, i.e., those of which one is the
discoverer, on the sure touchstone of the understanding, and on other
men's insights.
Opposed to this inclination of human reason to communicate its judgment is logical egoism, of which we also said something above. Where one
believes, namely, and fully persuades oneself, that one simply does not
need the help of the judgment of others in a judgment of the understanding. It is true, of course, that in matters of the understanding the judgment 179
of others judges nothing. But it is still not on this account superfluous, nor
yet dispensable. By instinct, man's understanding is communicatio. If it is
communicative/ then, it must really be sympathetic,' too, and it must be
concerned with what others judge of it.
The prejudice of the prestige which other people have with us is,
furthermore, the prejudice of antiquity, or the prejudice of modernity, on
which the liveliness of wit depends. The prejudice of antiquity is grounded
on esteem toward the old. What survives of the old into our times always
contains the illusion of being good, for one infers that it would be hard for
it to have survived and to have come down to us if it were not good and
were of no value. Just as we also take those buildings to be good which, if
they are old, nevertheless still stand, without having gone to ruin, while on
the other hand others have gone to ruin due to the length of time.
No judgment is more universal than that the world is gradually deteriorating/ Everything in the world deteriorates:g animals, horses, etc., become worse when they have lived long[;] bodies, e.g., clocks, become
worse with time. And one makes this very judgment of the whole world, of
the whole of nature in general, that it is gradually deteriorating more and
"mittheilenden Beschaffenheit."
"mittheilend."
"theilnehmend."
"veralte."
"deterioriret sich."
141I M M A N U E L KANT
more.* Thus one wonders at people who are old and still healthy, robust,
and says, Where do we find one such as this among us today? So is it, too,
with the books that survive among thousands of others that are lost[;] on
this account we take them, not without some ground, to be exceptionally
good, because they have retained prestige in spite of the usual decay that
commonly befalls such writings.
Young people are in most cases inclined to the prejudice of modernity. Age,
on the other hand, [is inclined] to the prejudice of antiquity. "Just as youth is
usually generous, but age stingy." Nevertheless, it is also true, of course,
that the cause of prejudices can frequently be alteration of temperament.
To age belongs industry and diligence.
To the new, however, [belong] genius, liveliness, and constantly chang-
180 ing wit.' Of course we see the individuals of nature decay and perishf;] all
works of art perish. Rome itself falls. Cliffs split apart, etc. - Man perishes and dies at every age. Half of mankind perishes by the age of 15
yearsf;] in the 16 /2 th year, none[;] in the 50th year, one in 100. It is held,
furthermore, that in all things, the perfections of the world are themselves
gradually declining. Horace says: "our descendants will produce still
worse brood than we are."
But this prejudice is completely incorrect. Only in more recent times
have people considered this thing more and better than in ancient times.
What nature produces has such persistence that nothing, no time, no
age, can alter it. If we exclude the time before the Flood, then after that
everything in the world is equally good, equally strong, the propagation
and power of propagation are just as good, just as possible, although one
nation here can have some advantage or other over others, of course, to
which the special circumstances of climate, of food supplies, etc., must of
course contribute something.
With many books one can see in the first moment when they appear in
the world that they will not long be prized or esteemed. These books are
like those papillonsj that appear with all splendor, are admired by everyone,
but do not last longer than the summer and are soon thereafter forgotten.
Other writings, however, which contain much thoroughness, are of such a
kind that they are carried forth from one age to the next and always retain
their authority.
From this it flows naturally that one reserves a kind of esteem for these,
and holds them to be valuable.
If one considers how in the sciences time reveals everything bad, one
can well ask, How will it turn out with our current learnedness?
A living language always changes, but a dead one never does[;] all
"sie deterioriret sich mehr und mehr, sie veralte allmählig."
"Witz ohne Stätigkeit."
French: butterflies.
142
autores are inexhaustible sources for it. Current German poets will certainly seem bad after 100 years. Dead languages have the advantage that
they remain eternally beautiful and independent.
Our current languages may well never become dead ones, for only the
Scriptures and religion make a language dead. Thus the theologians are 181
the proper guardians of learnedness, and with them many languages
would come to a complete and utter end.
The corpus jurisk is certainly the greatest and most certain proof of
human profundity. The discovery of the pandects2« in Naples in the nth
saeculum, however, is the best find among books that men have ever
attained. In general, however, the ancients are always inimitable models
for writing style.
When one considers the ancient world as a whole, and all its individual
creatures, one easily sees that the longer the series of copies that are
subordinated to one another, the greater the divergence from the originalis.
The first creatures were quite perfect, but through their reproduction
and distribution they became more and more dissimilar, at least to one
another. Regardless of this, however, one nevertheless finds that no
change has occurred in the kinds andgeneraL of creatures; instead, everything is still as it was at the creation of the world and of all things. It is
always a prejudice, then, if one prizes the old so excessively.
Moreover, the esteem we have for the ancients arises from a certain
kind of illusion of our understanding and our reason.
We always prize learnedness highly[;] even in our own case, we always
feel a certain esteem' for ourselves if we are learned.
Learning the ancient involves and requires learnedness. This is a further ground for the prejudice of antiquity. Cognition of the ancient frequently involves great learnedness[;] therefore it happens that we think
highly of the ancient, just because we are able to have insight into it only
through learnedness. This esteem for the ancient frequently falls on the
ancient autores, because they wrote something, the understanding of
which requires learnedness. This is a genus of inner deception. One
esteems the ancient, and per consequentiam also the ancients.
The language of the ancients is itself already a [matter of] learnedness[;] from this it follows, then, that what is written in such a language
already acquires a certain kind of esteem, because for the science of the
language alone a certain learnedness is required, without which one is not 182
in a position to understand it.
In the case of the ancients,"1 so much proves useful that one simply does
not notice their errors, indeed, one is not even in a position to cognize
* body of law.
' "eine gewiße Hochachtung, eine Estime."
m Reading "bei denen Alten" for "denen Alten."
143
whether there are errors in an ancient writing or not. It seems to be wholly
reasonable, however, to prize the ancients highly, with thankfulness, because we are only their pupils, after all. Indeed, we ourselves hope that
someday we will also be known among our descendants as the beloved
ancients, and we promise ourselves the same esteem and thanks from them
that we now render to the ancients. The ancients are for us the original
itself, who are beyond all judging, beyond all critique. What a prejudice,
when an author is such that one no longer criticizes or passes judgment on
his language but instead accepts it as perfectly beautiful and beyond
improvement.
If one meets with contorted modes of speech in a Cicero, Horatius,
etc., and others of that sort, who have been accepted as autores classici,
beyond improvement, then one will not say that Cicero, etc., should not
have spoken thus, that he could have avoided an error if he had expressed
it somewhat differently, etc. Instead one approves of it; and we are allowed
to speak thus too, merely because Cicero, etc., has done so so perversely.
Just so do all the ancient poets, in all their mistakes, have the licentia
poetica. Here we see which prejudices arise from the prestige that antiquity has with us. Hence there are so many advocates of antiquity who, as
soon as something is invented in modern times, show at once that the
ancients already knew all ofthat. That there is nothing properly new, then,
but only what is sought out from the writings of the ancients and somewhat brought to light.
But here we must ask whether we do not have cause to make into a
prejudice a certain provisional judgment in favor of antiquity and the
ancients concerning their cognitions and insights.
Answer. Of course; the ancients quite certainly had the advantage over
us that they at least had no established models, no originalia, which they
could have followed and should have copied. They themselves had to
provide and become their own originals, whether they wanted to or not,
because they had no other guidance but nature and their reason.
183 Today, however, due to the excessive multitude of originalia., nothing
but copies are produced, and many potential new originals are stifled.
The ancients had another advantage in regard to their thinking in the
fact that their realms were in most cases divided into small[,] very numerous countries and republiques, which were all quite free and did not need
to groan under the burden of a monarchical and strict sovereignty (for
freedom in thought originates from a free form of government, as we have
already had occasion to remark above)[.] This free condition, so advantageous for the development of the arts and sciences, was found above all in
ancient Greece. Here one knew nothing of any monarchy, and instead
everything followed its own inclination and ruled itself.
This mode of life, this form of state and of government, naturally
brought it about that such great, inimitable, outstanding geniuses and
144
minds were found among them and showed themselves to the world,
especially in the fine arts, and in particular in painting an Apelles, etc., in
oratory a Demosthenes, in poetry [ . . . ] .
Even today we still find that in those countries where the spirit of
freedom reigns, much, and much more, is discovered, many more originalia arise, and far fewer copies appear, than where a despotic, monarchical form of government is introduced.
England provides us with an example of this[;] here one finds even
today the most and the best archetypes and models. There everyone thinks
for himself, speaks, writes for himself, etc., without choosing a model and
imitating it, trying to follow it everywhere.
On the other hand, countries where monarchs and individual princes
rule despotically, and one has command over all, produce nothing but
copies and seldom originalia. Here the court is in most cases die original,
and everyone strives to imitate what goes on at court. The writing style of
the court is the writing style of all others (just as one likes to wear the
clothes that are customarily worn at court). One sees this today, e.g., in
France[;] there one seldom meets with an original, but instead in most
cases with mere copies. Everything there is modish, both in clothes and in
judgments and writings.
The writing style of the English authors can thus be quite easily distin- 184
guished from all others. The one always says something different from
what the other has said. The French, on the other hand, always write in
one and the same writing style[;] the one makes use of almost the same
modes of speech as the other. Hence it happens, too, that one French
author cannot easily be distinguished from another, and among them one
seldom meets with anything special[,] exceptional, new[,] or unusual.
Now we come to the prejudice of modernity. This is grounded partly on
the provisional judgment that we make in most cases in favor of, and to
the advantage of, the new. We have cause to make favorable judgments
toward the ancient, but also toward the modern.
All those sciences that presuppose an extensive, historical, correct cognition, become ever more perfect in modern times, for it is known that
modern learned men strive more and more to extend historical cognitions.
In empirical cognitions, the modern always has an unassailable advantage
over the ancient. In sciences, on the. other hand, for which persistent
industry, everlasting effort, is required, the modern has likewise a more
favorable judgment over die ancient, and not because it contradicts the
ancient, but because it frequently adds more to it. If one prizes the
modern highly because it contradicts the ancient, however, then this is
really a very harmful prejudice. But in part die prejudice of modernity is
also grounded on a certain illusion of our understanding, our reason, and
our imagination. The old man loves the old, but a young man the new.
Age makes man much inclined to defend antiquity, youth on the other
145
hand to speak in favor of modernity. If youth owes all its cognition and all
science to the ancients, and has merely learned these things from the
ancients but not discovered them by itself, then it has no merit of its own,
and thus it is also quite inclined to invent new sciences and to add more to
the ancient ones.
Whole nations are frequently much inclined toward the ancient, others
again toward the modern. The Spaniard and the Portuguese love the
ancient, the Frenchman, on the other hand, die modern. Inert, slow,
melancholic, and reflective minds love die ancient very much. Lively,
vigorous ones, on die odier hand, love die modern. The former are
185 enemies of new fashions, the latter friends. The Frenchman is stylish in
clodies, in systems, in medicines, etc. The Frenchman is die first originator and founder of each and every fashion, and the only one who will
always remain so. He alone has the fickleness and facility necessary[,]
requisite for this. The French are thus too much given to the prejudice of
modernity, which arises
1. from the fact that the modem contradicts the ancient or
2. from loving the modern, first because it preserves the ancient, but also because it adds something new to it.
Inclination is also a great source of favorable prejudice. This includes
the insinuation, e.g., of the external control of mien, of name, e.g., widi
books the title. "A good title sells the book," and in accordance widi
current fashion an easy," impertinent, French tide, e.g., when Beaumelle
publishes a book with the title, Mes pensees, etc.2s Should we not esteem
die ancient inhabitants of Greece, since in this favorable climate all
learnedness arosef,] as we said above?
But a kind of recommendation that stimulates respect toward someone
originates from the fact that," when we have disdained someone, if we
discover and become aware of something unexpectedly great, a beautiful
insight, a genius that surpasses all our expectation, we then prize him all
the more highly[;] we admire him all the more, because we disdained him
previously. Thus it is when we hear a woman, of whose insights and skill
we have only a negative view, speaking with great insight, wit, etc.[;] we
admire her all die more, and our disdain or contempt dius changes
quickly into veneration. Just in this way, e.g., do we learn to esteem, and
revere, etc., die great wise man Epicurus, of whom we perhaps had a
negative view in the beginning, when we investigate more closely his
behavior, his speeches, his judgments, cognitions/ He who strives to
consider everytiiing from die worst side, and who prefers to seek out
"Leichter, legairer."
Reading "daher, daß wir, wenn" for "daher, wenn," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"Kenntniße."
146
errors everywhere rather than good attributes, certainly has a very malicious heart.
It is always with discontent and reluctance that one reads books where
the fame and the honor of the human race[,] along with its good attributes[,] are subverted. It is characteristic of human nature that is not
spoiled by a bad heart always, in every writing, in every action, to assume 186
and to suppose the best[;] and actually one always gains thereby, too,
rather than being harmed.
Some time ago a quarrel arose among some learned Frenchmen[;]
some elevated and defended the ancient, others, on the other hand, the
modern. The former held the ancient to be an original, and the modern
only frequently spoiled copies[.] The latter, among whom Fontenelle26 was
also prominent, maintained that the modern could frequently surpass the
ancient, even greatly. The ancients can frequently be in a position to
produce products superior to modern ones, but frequently the modern
can also surpass the ancient by far.
In oratory, poetry, statuary, in painting, in all the fine arts and sciences,
then, the ancients have surpassed us. But couldn't modern times also
produce better products than the ancients produced? This is a wholly
different question. Oratory, e.g., was so much cultivated among the ancients because everyone was allowed to appear before a people that was
free, and he actually did appear frequently and speak.
Here, then, everyone who was disposed to make a public exposition
before such a public convocation necessarily had to apply all his industry
and effort to achieve his end of moving the people and of attaining the
approval of his listeners.
Question[.] Would it ever be possible to destroy and root out each and
every prejudice in man?
Answer. It almost seems to be impossible. Man is accustomed to have
motives* in his soul which he cannot resist, and which rush on ahead of
the judgments of the understanding, and in this way form a prejudice.
To be sure, man can learn to distinguish what arises from motives, what
from the understanding^] that is actually a great deal, and then he cannot
be deluded and deceived any more, and not as frequently as previously,
although the inclination toward this is still there at each moment, of
course[;] but to rid oneself of this completely and fully, to get free of it,
this seems to be impossible and would never happen. Both in common life
in morals and here in logic, nonetheless, each and every pious deception
in the application of the powers of the understanding is unforgivable; i.e., 187
philosophy always tries to destroy' the intention and the effort to want to
produce something true with the help of prejudices.
* "Triebfedern."
' "verfolgt."
147
A proposition is not a prejudice, be it as false as we wish. For a prejudice
is nothing other than the mere desire to want to judge, yet without the
proper acuity or reflection.
How, then, do our prejudicesarise?
The inclination of the mind to judge in accordance with authority,
inclination, custom, fashion, this is prejudice. Proverbs are in most cases
false, for many of them are of such a kind that one can use them no matter
what.
In most cases, children learn Latin in school with difficulty. Why is
that? Because one demands and wants of them that they should be able to
speak pure Latin, when they are scarcely aware of the principles of this
language and its first grammatical rules. All the prejudices of which we
have previously spoken arise, then, either
1. from bad education, or
2. from examples and imitation of them[.]
The prejudice of excessive trust placed in oneself is nothing other than egoism.
Egoism, however, is vel cosmologicus, when one holds that there is no
other thinking being, no world outside me, vel logicus,* when one holds
that he alone judges rationally, that no one else is in a position to judge
something or better to be able to have insight into it. This latter[,] namely,
egoismus logicus[,] seems initiallyactuallyto be allowed. One has no need to
consult other judgments,of course, when one cognizes something correctly
oneselff;] one need not seek to bring about an agreement of others with the
cognition that one has oneself. But on closer investigation we find that one
cannot be certain whether one has judged rightly or not if one has not
compared his judgmentswith the judgments of others and tested them on
the understanding of others. For a cognition is not correct when it agrees
with my private understanding but when it agrees with the universal laws of
the understanding of all men. Therefore, as we have already shown above,
188 everyman has an inclination to communicate'his judgments to others. This
is the true friendship of sentiment. The logical egoist thus robs himself of a
great, extremely important, necessary advantage, very conducive to the
enrichment and improvement of his understanding, the ability to distinguish correctly the true from the false per communicationem judiciorum, et
mutuam dijudicationem eorum invicem." Sometimes, however, logical egoism
also arises from a certain kind of meekness and faintheartedness, since one
trusts himself and his insights far too little and believes that his judgments
would not be worth being known by others in the whole learned world.
Logical egoism is opposed, however, to another prejudice, namely,
1 either cosmological... or logical.
' "zu communiciren, und mitzutheilen."
" through the communication of judgments and the mutual adjudication of these from
both sides.
148
where one builds all his judgments on the reason of others, judges nothing
himself, but merely imitates, in that one elevates others above oneself and
trusts nothing to oneself. To speak briefly, these are the prejudices of the
lazy.
There are also certain arts and sciences, however, which are of such a
kind that they can be learned, indeed, must be, through mere imitation.
These include, e.g., all crafts,r likewise mathematics, in which one may
expound to someone certain propositions, and demonstrate and prove
them properly, propositions which he commits to memory and diereby in
fact is in a position to become an actual mathematicus. But other sciences,
on the other hand, are again of such a kind that they cannot be learned at
all by imitation, but instead genius is required to learn them. These
include, e.g., the whole of philosophy. We are certain that no one will ever
be able to become a true philosopher, provided that one does nodiing
more than imitate the philosophers of earlier times, that one leafs
through, or reads through, their writings now and again, and that one
accepts as true what they have said, and in so doing completely forgets
oneself, so to speak. If one does not trust oneself in the least, then, and
makes no judgments at all oneself, either, but swears in verba magistri."
Nothing is more harmful in philosophy than to imitate. Nothing is more
unfortunate and ruinous for the understanding, e.g., than to pick up a
Wolffius, or a Crusius, or others, to commit his definitiones to memory, to
impress them there, striaissime* and word for word, and to prize them as
stars of the first magnitude, but to value oneself at nothing[;] instead, one 189
must learn to think for oneself, to judge for oneself, to reflect on objects
oneself, and, in order to be able to become and to be a philosopher, to
learn to philosophize. Philosophy cannot in the least be learned from
books, but only through one's own reflection and one's own meditation.
We have two sorts of prejudices that relate to learnedness, however.
Namely, a prejudiceT_/0r learnedness, and again a prejudice against it and
for the common, healthy understanding.
Learned people, and also other[,] common people have a prejudice for
learnedness. They often accept everything that is said and also taught by
learned people. Moralists, on the other hand, have a prejudice for the
common and healthy understanding, whichpraejudicium is also characteristic of many common people. This latter prejudice comes about because no
one denies that he has healthy understanding. There has never been a man,
namely, who believed he had no sens commun, sensus communis, common,
healthy understanding. One admits readily and willingly that one has a
bad[,] deficient memory. Again, someone else admits that he has no quick-
1 Reading "Handwercke" for "Handwercker."
" in the words of the master.
* as strictly as possible.
* Reading "Vorurtheil" for "Urtheil."
149
ness in conceiving, no wit, no witty observations, no genius for this or that
individual science, no taste in poetry. But everyone believes himself to
possess sensus communis. No man will so readily deny this of himself.
Now since, of those who have a healthy understanding, the fewest are
learned people, and since it is a known but true proverb: ut ars non
habeat osorem, nisi imperitum,z then of course we must not wonder if
from this it quite easily arises that be it out of ignorance, be it out of envy,
learnedness is scarcely respected by many, if it is not disdained, and on the
other hand that the common[,] healthy understanding is elevated infinitely.
Here the author also brings up the prejudice of the accepted system. In
almost all parts of learnedness the prejudice of unity occurs.
A system is distinguished by nothing other than the fact that there is a
unity in it. The human understanding, however, is such that it approves
190 everything in which a unity can be found, and from this arises the prejudice for unity, of course.
We always believe we have made everything perfect, or as perfect as
possible, when we have been able to bring it to the point where we have
reduced it to a unity.
Just so is unity in a certain wayingratiating and pleasing, in that it seems
to contain in itself economy with the powers of our understanding.
Further, where unity can be found, there one necessarily finds order,
too.
Also, many beginners have a certain prejudice for the excellence and
the advantage of a thing that they have learned with much industry and
work, and which has cost them much effort, much sweat. (So to speak[.]
E.g.f,] someone has had dreadfully much work, and has had to make an
effort, in learning the French language. But he was serious about learning
it and finally accomplished his end, too, so he has a great prejudice for the
internal worth of the thing.)
The prejudice of lazy trust arises from a certain kind of crude ignorance and inertia in attaining this or that cognition, and from a quite illplaced, contemptible contempt toward cognition that arises from this,
merely because one cannot share in it. Thus, e.g., as the fox in the fable
disdains the grapes that he cannot snatch, in spite of his leaps and effort,
and scorns them as sour.
In almost all parts of learnedness the prejudice of unity probably occurs[.]
When very many properties and determinations of a thing can be derived from one ground, we are commonly accustomed in most cases to
make the provisional judgment, and to have the supposition, that we will
of course be able to derive from it all the remaining determinations of the
same thing, and that this one ground that we have concerning this thing
2 that art has no enemy but ignorance.
ISO
will thus be almost the true and fully sufficient ground of this whole thing.
We sometimes accept a ground, namely, and infer from its consequences
that this is the only true ground, regardless of the fact that such a thing is
very seldom fully certain.
E.g., if we entertain one or another supposition that this or that man is a
thief, then we frequently infer merely from the consequences whether this 191
supposition can be true or not true but rather false. If we find, e.g., that
this or that man stands in connection with us, that he at first had and
possessed nothing at all, but later suddenly squandered very much money,
and that this happens at that the same time that this or that money of mine
disappeared and presumably was stolen, then we surely believe that he
must be the thief who stole our money. Although this presumption can
very frequently be false and incorrect, indeed, even insulting and sinful.
From this provisional judgment the prejudice of unity arises, namely,
when one finds a ground for a thing that has very many consequences and
determinations, then one derives all further consequences and determinations from it. Thus it happened, e.g., with electricity in the beginning, in
order to give an example. At that time, namely, one explained everything
that was the least bit remarkable by means of it[;] indeed, there were even
some refined minds who went so far as to want to maintain that electricity
had an influence on religion, namely, in that they wanted to exert themselves to explain, e.g., even Christ's healing of the bleeding woman2' by
means of the powers of electricity.
Anyone who finds, or at least believes he finds, the source of all wisdom
and cognition in one ground, is always much inclined to ascribe to it even
more than can really be found in it. Someone else believes he has healthy
understanding but will nevertheless amuse and please himself; but he is far
more inclined to satisfy his inclinations as much as possible, rather than to
choose the path of reflection and of workf;] and in this way one often falsely
holds an understanding that is neither exercised" nor cultivated to be the
common understanding. For one can rightfully and in a proper sense call
this understanding a plainb understanding. For although we now combine
with this expression a negative view and an unfavorable meaning, it is
known that the beloved ancients had the proverb: Plain and right and thus
good.' And here they took the word plaind in a very good sense.
All the prejudices of the kind of which we have previously spoken can
be divided into
"i) prejudices of pride
2) prejudices of meekness and of excessive fearfulness."
" "Exercirt."
"einen schlechten Verstand." ("Schlecht" also means "bad," as the lines following suggest.)
' "'schlecht und recht, und damit gut:"
d "schlecht?
151
192 Theformer, the prejudices ofpride[,} arise when one imputes far too much
to his insights, cognitions, and judgments.
The prejudices of meekness andfearfulness arise, however, from the fact that
one attributes far too little to his judgments generally, or to his powers of
understanding.
Often there arises in us even a prejudice toward but also against a whole
science, and this because the science has perhaps often erred, and we
have noted its mistakes closely and given attention to them. Thus it
happened, e.g., with metaphysica, and when it happens thus with many
sciences that they often err, then there arises from this a kind of skepticism, addiction to doubt, which can often extend itself to all the sciences.
This comes from a weak understanding, however, which does not want to
be laughed at, although it is not in a position to pass judgmenton cognitions' and sciences itself. Such people commonly believe little or nothing
at all. And this prejudice of mistrust, which originates in experience,
unfortunately arises only too often among men.
Fashions are nothing but stimulants of vanity or encouragements for the
application of a certain vanity/ and thus they arise through the choice of
prestigious, great men, men of high rank. Thus it happens in most cases,
e.g., in style, in musique, in architecture.
That which does not rest on true honor but instead merely on the effort
to please, i.e., on fashion, is a matter of vanity.
Much, e.g., that now is actually accounted as lastingly beautiful in our
writing style is nonetheless nothing but the fashion of our time. Very many
learned men and beautiful minds* are actually often more harmful than
useful to the learned world.
A Young,2S a Klopstock,2<> a Gleim,i° etc., have, e.g., really spoiled a multitude of weak minds.
The ignorant in most cases imitate the errors, but not the beauties, of
the original that they have before them, only in order to try to become
equal to a person who, due to this or that book, poem, etc., is in a position
to get much attention. Thus it would be, e.g., if some man or woman seeks
to imitate the lisping of a beautiful person,* thus becoming ridiculous.
193 Sometimes a mistake helps a man's wit, talents, etc., which otherwise
are not very considerable, to shine forth and to glitter.
Fashion introduces clothes, manners, indeed, often even morals, and in
a certain way it is almost good to follow fashion, if only its customs are not
opposed to the eternal and unchangeable laws of morality, for with its help
men are in a certain way better united and made to agree.
The prejudice of shallowness, furthermore, is the same prejudice of
' "Kenntniße."
f "Empfehlungen des Gebrauchs einer gewißen Eitelkeit."
g "Schöndenkende Geister."
* "einer schönen Person."
152
which we have already spoken above, namely, the prejudiced/or the healthy
understanding. For this latter is shallow in objects of learnedness.
Voltaire is certainly one of the greatest defenders of shallowness. He
seeks, namely, to derive almost everything from the healthy understanding, and his judgment sometimes has no sufficient ground.
Healthy reason is not to be rejected as much as one thinksf;] often it is
actually the source of many cognitions.
Thus it is of course a prejudice, again, if one rejects the sensus
communis.
There is also, furthermore, a certain prejudice against healthy human
reason, and also a prejudice for healthy human reason. In the former
prejudice, namely, one believes that we cannot have insight into anything
at all by means of human reason, but in the other case, on the other hand,
one believes one can have insight into everything by this means. In the
former case, then, we trust, healthy human reason too little, but in the
other case we trust healthy reason too much and ascribe too much to it.
One must not despise the human race, take all its prejudices to be
worth nothing and want to despise them, but instead grant it the advantages it has. It is true that one cannot have insight into much through
reason (namely, through common healthy human reason), but nonetheless
it is not on this account to be rejected, but rather always has its worth.
Until the end of this paragraphus the author speaks of the prejudice
against antiquity, and also of the prejudice against modernity. But we have
spoken of both these prejudices above.
The prejudice against the ancient is always combined and inseparably 194
united with the prejudice^ the modern, and again every prejudice against
the modern is always combined on the contrary with a prejudice for the
ancient; and the one kind of prejudice cannot be thought without the
other. For he who loves the ancient much cannot esteem the modern et
vice versa.
§ i?i
"Every cognition from merely insufficient grounds is uncertain." When a
cognition from merely insufficient grounds of truth is cognized in such a
way that I have insight into far more grounds for than against the thing,
then it is plausible. If finally, however, there are many more grounds for
than against the cognitions, or when more than half of the grounds, at
least, are for the cognitions (whether I have insight into these grounds or
not), then it is probable.
Plausibility rests merely on the subjectf.]
Probability [rests] on the object, in such a way that I thereby actually
cognize more grounds for the thing than there possibly are for maintaining the opposite of the thing. With plausibility an error can actually be met
153
with, and that in form, since one is not conscious of the insufficient
grounds. The first rule is thus: with all cognitions, even true ones, seek
first of all to become conscious of the uncertainty that arises and ever
could arise from insufficient grounds[;] one should place himself, as it
were, in the position of the opponent, of the doubter, who believe themselves to have sufficient grounds for maintaining the opposite of this
cognition; for otherwise one will almost always, in most cases, err and
deceive oneself.
One can never know whether one cognizes more grounds for than
against the thing, and one cannot gain insight into this until one has a
cognition from a sufficient ground.
Hence with all cognitions one must seek first of all to acquaint oneself
with the sufficient ground, or to know and to cognize how many grounds
are properly required for full certainty of a thing, so that one can distinguish suitably whether something is plausible or probable in the first
place.
195 When one does not cognize the sufficient ground of a thing, then
neither can one determine how many grounds for its truth are necessary
in order first to make the cognition probable.
If I subtract the grounds for holding-to-be-true from all the possible
grounds that are necessary and required for certainty, and if I compare
these directly with one another and consider them, then the remaining
ones are grounds for the opposite. Then I can quite easily see which
grounds are predominant, whether they be grounds for or grounds against
the cognition. Plausibility can alter greatly, for its certainty' is grounded in
the subject, but probability always remains unchanged[,] the same, and
this merely because it is grounded in the object.
Writing style is naturally very changeable, especially because today one
can cognize more groundsfor this thing but tomorrow, on the other hand,
more grounds against it[,] [accordingly as one directs his thoughts to the
thing in various ways, and as one further investigates and reflects upon
this or that and strives to seek it out. The ground of approval is always at
least the beginning of the sufficient ground.
It is, however, a ground, even if it is not complete. It is wholly wrong,
indeed, even erroneous, to hold an insufficient ground to be no ground at
all[;] it is at least matter for further investigation and inquiry. An ounce is
always a ground for lifting a pound, although it is not yet sufficient, for
several ounces taken together make up a pound.
All our conviction and assurance concerning any cognition must necessarily go through all the same elements. First we only suppose that something is true. In all things, be they what they will, incompleteness makes
Reading "Gewißheit" for "Wichtigkeit."
154
the beginning. By investigating, and by untiring attention, we make something complete.
True sagacity is always, as it were, a spying out[,] a scent, of the truth in
advance. It is one of the most outstanding talents of good minds and
contemplation. Thus it happens, e.g., with discoveries of [new] worlds.
Grounds of supposition have often in these same cases been causes of
inquiry and causes of discoveries. In this way the new world, etc., was
discovered, and in this way much more can still be discovered. If we have
a few such insufficient grounds of truth before us, then we either have 196
plausibil'ty (and this is only the least degree), verisimilitudo, or we have
probability, probabilitas, as a greater degree.' The sufficient ground of
holding-to-be-true, unity, is that whereby a thing is posited.
No ground can be more than sufficient, for otherwise it is not a ground
at all, just as nothing can be more than true, more than false, more than
good, more than bad, for otherwise it is nothing.
The sufficient ground comprehends everything in itself, but the concept of everything contains also at the same time a unity. But I can never
say more than everything about a thing. Nothing is more than true.*
Nothing is all-too-true. Nothing is too certain. Nothing is more than
sufficient, as we often wrongly express ourselves in common life. The
insufficient ground of holding-to-be-true produces plausibility.
Probability is a fraction, where the sufficient ground of truth is the
denominator, the insufficient grounds that I have for taking-to-be-true are
the numerator.
One can actually calculate mathematically the degree of probability or
the degree of improbability of one or another empirical thing. Thus, e.g.,
in all games, lotteries, in the death of human beings according to their
years, and many other augmentative phenomena,' as changes in the world.
With our philosophical truths we cognize nothing other than a plausibility, of this thing or that.
We have certain grounds for the truth of the thing, and we cognize
fewer for the opposite of the thing, since there is no one who is in a
position to teach us more grounds against the truth of the thing dian for
it[;] our cognition is thus nothing more than plausible.
People earlier held the moon to be a small, luminous body, which was
there solely and simply for die sake of our earth. Later, however, people
gradually began to measure the magnitude of the moon, and then they
found that it was smaller dian our earth, that mountains and valleys exist
on it. Again, some astronomi even conjectured that it has inhabitants, but
others, on the other hand, diat it does not.
1 Reading "dieVerisimilitudinem .. . die Probabilitatem" for "die Probabilitas . . . die
Verisimilitudinem," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
* Reading "wahr" for "zu wahr."
"Augmenten."
155
This cognition of the moon was thus quite changeable, and just on that
197 account not probable, but instead only plausible[;] for the other, that which
is probable, cannot be changeable at all,but instead remains always one and
the same. Since all probability is not subjective but rather objective.
All plausible judgments, on the other hand, alter daily, accordingly as
one cognizes more or fewer grounds for or against the thing. What is
probable, on the other hand, is probable, so to speak, for eternity. For the
grounds of probability are still insufficient, of course, but nonetheless still
greater than the possible grounds for the opposite.
To know, however, whether the grounds for the truth of the thing are
greater than the grounds for the opposite, or whether the grounds for the
cognition constitute more than half of the sufficient ground, one must first
strive to attain a solid and honest cognition of the sufficient ground, as was
recalled above. Mathematics alone is the science which is of such a kind
that we can thereby cognize the sufficient ground of a thing. In philosophy, however, that does not hold at all[;] thus it happens, too, that all our
cognitions in philosophy, which are not undoubtedlycertain, can never be
probable, but always only plausible. With probability, namely, we do not
judge what is actual, but only what is possible under certain conditions.
This possibility always remains unchangeable, however, under one and
the same circumstances.
By means of probability, then, we really cognize degrees of possibility; if
these degrees are great, then there is a large probability, but if they are
small, then there is a small probability.
A cognition is doubtful, taken subjective^, when the grounds for the
thing that I cognize are equal to the grounds against the thing, i.e., the
grounds of its opposite. Something is doubtful objeaiveL, on the other
hand, when the grounds for the possibility of a thing, or of a matter that I
cognize, are completely equal to the grounds for the opposite of this thing,
and hence there are just as many grounds for the thing as against it.
Something can be practically certain subjective^, although objective-^ only
very little contributes to its sufficient ground.
198 § 175
As for what concerns certainty, there are three particular and completely
different genera of it, namely,
ist logical
2nd practical
3rd aesthetic certainy.
Logical certainty is certainty according to the rules of the understanding and of reason and hence is an objective certainty that is grounded in
the thing itself.
156
Aesthetic certainty is certainty according to the rules of taste.
Practical certainty is certainty according to the rules of free will.
Someone is practically certain when the grounds he has for holding a
cognition to be true are sufficient to determine him to actions; nonetheless, if he does not will to act, then these grounds are not at all sufficient
enough to make him logically certain. In many cases, practical certainty
actually involves very little cognition, but in many cases, again, much more
is required for moral or practical certainty than for logical certainty. E.g.,
when it comes to damning someone, to condemning someone to death,
etc.
Someone can be aesthetically certain if he holds the opposite of a thing
or cognition that he has to be impossible merely because it does not please
him. Thus, e.g., if his cognition is to believe in a divine being, eternal
government, a future world, reward for good actions, punishment for bad
ones, etc. Certainty here rests merely on feelingf;] as something gives
someone pleasure or displeasure, so accordingly does he accept it or
reject it.
In this way the human mind is actually subjected to very many illusions
and deceptionsf;] frequently we take something to be certain merely because it pleases us, and we take something to be uncertain merely because
it displeases or annoys us. This certainty or uncertainty is not objective,
however, but instead subjective. Frequently it can even keep us from
properly seeking for, or investigating, the opposite of a thing and the
grounds for that opposite.
Often we find more comfort in holding something to be true because 199
we would have to inconvenience ourselves if we were to give ourselves the
trouble of investigating the contrarium of the thing. We take the opposite to
be impossible merely because we have no desire to try to investigate it.
Practical certainty, finally, is a certainty according to the rules of prudence and of morality. The latter is a moral certainty, however. There have
been a few who believed that the moral is much less than the practical.
Thus one says, e.g., that it is morally certain that there are inhabitants on
the moon, etc. But this does not have the least connection with my actions.
However, when something is practically certain, then it is often not on that
account morally certain at all, and when likewise something is morally
certain, then frequently it is not yet on that account logically certain. The
possibility of a thing can produce in us a practical certaintyf;] e.g, if
someone only believes that it is possible that there is a God, then this
thought must nonetheless have an influence on his life, just as if he were
completely certain and convinced of this cognition.
The plausibility of a thing can likewise produce a greater degree of
certainty.
Something can be completely certain in the practical sense although in
the logical sense it is only plausible or at most probable.
157
The poet cannot be more than merely morally certain about one thing
or another. Stories are of such a kind that they can only be practically
certain. Logical certainty is quite often lacking and one can easily manage
to find grounds for the opposite and to contradict historical reports.
One can easily prove that the historicus has told not true stories, really,
but instead only fables and fictiones. Actually, too, there are many such
people, who occupy themselves with weakening the full certainty of history, which requires no art, either, but instead is easy, because what is
necessary and sufficient for practical certainty is not sufficient for speculation and for logical certainty. Practical certainty is one that in respect of
certain actions brings about just the same thing as full certainty. E.g., if
200 something of value in my house disappears and at just the same time my
servant disappears, then my practical certainty is that the missing servant
has stolen what I am missing. Although no logical certainty exists, and the
servant can have gone away and disappeared for completely different
causes and in another way.
Practical certainty, however, is twofold
1. pragmatic and
2. moral certainty.
When a cognition that is probable in itself is just as certain a ground for
actions according to the rules of prudence as if it were fully certain, then
such a thing is pragmatic certainty.
When, however, a cognition that is probable in itself is just as certain a
ground for actions according to the rules of morality as if it were completely certain, then such a thing is moral certainty."1
Even what is logically improbable can nonetheless be morally certain,
e.g., when I demand money from someone and do not know whether I
have already received it or not, and the other[,] my presumed debtor[,]
knows just as little whether he has paid it to me or not, then according to
morals I cannot demand any more of him, although it is logically uncertain
whether he has paid something or not. Logical certainty of the existence
of God can also be attained, although such a thing is very hard. All men,
however, can attain moral certainty, even without great logical speculationes. If only we sharpen someone's moral judgments, we can thereby
easily bring him to conviction of the existence of God.
Logical certainty of a future life is very hard to attain, but one can well
attain moral certainty of it if one considers that here on earth happiness is
not always a consequence of good behavior, hence another world is to be
hoped for in which this will occur.
Moral certainty and uncertainty must be spoken of and treated along
with other things in morals proper.
™ Reading "Gemisheit" for "Weisheit."
158
Most, almost all autores are completely unaquainted with moral certainty, and instead they take it in each case to be probabilityf.] E.g. It is
uncertain whether there are inhabitants on the moon, but nevertheless is
still probable. A few accept this as a moral judgment, but this is not the 201
case, for such zjudiaum has no influence at all on behavior. It is a logical
probability and a mere speculation.
Nothing is a moral judgment except what has a relation to my actions. If
someone is supposed to act, then, and must, and his grounds are merely
probable, then the grounds that have the greatest probability constitute
practical certainty.
§176
Every ground of the opposite of a thing, of which one is conscious, is
called a doubt. Every obstacle to holding-to-be-true is a logical difficulty,
and this is
ist objective, i.e.,a doubt.
2nd subjective, i.e., a scruple.
The latter, that is, subjective difficulty, is really incomprehensibility,
where I do not reject a cognition but instead notice that I cannot come to
terms with it. This subjective obstacle of the understanding is fine work
for a philosopher who wants to study mankind. The study of scruples is of
great importance.
The study of doubt is somewhat easier[.] To find a scruple in ourselves
before we can say that we cannot comprehend a cognition is very hard.
Scruples hinder man from holding-to-be-true and cannot be resolved
either by the man who has them or by someone else.
Scruples can become doubts, however, namely, when one becomes
conscious of them, and this is also most necessary.
One transforms a scruple into a doubt by considering the cognition with
which the scruple is accompanied in all manner of various relations and in
various conditions, since then one will find out and notice at once, without
any effort, which is the side on which we cannot yet be fully decided, and
which, on the other hand, is the side where no further scruple remains.
In themselves, then, scruples are not at all to be despised, or immediately to be reproved and rejected.
There are scruples subjectively, however, that lie in the man who has
one or another cognition, and these one must not heed. Objective scru- 202
pies, however, which lie in the cognition itself, one must seek to make
clear. If someone expounds for me nothing but plausible propositions,
then I have a scruple and do not yet give him my approval. E.g., I consider
the proposition that all moral judgments should rest on a particular feeling
and sensation, I give it approval, but a certain scruple still remains in me
159
nonethelessf;] I cannot refute the proposition, but nonetheless I cannot
trust the cognition.
If I consider the scruple more closely and reflect on the thing better,
then there arises from this a doubt. I see that if I accept this proposition as
true, it necessarily follows from this that someone who does not have this
feeling and this sensation would be in no position to make any moral
judgments, which seldom, or even never, happens.
From this doubt, however, something else again must necessarily arise,
namely, I will make various objections against the truth of the proposition;
and these objections finally eventuate in a complete refutation based on
certain grounds, which otherwise is called simply a reply.
If I reject the doubt based on grounds that only one man holds and
accepts as correctly sufficient," then these grounds, as well as this reply,
hold merely for an individual subject[;] hence it is then a so-called
responsio, et refutatio ad hominem.
This occurs with a kind of reluctance" and occurs merely in order to get
the opponent off one's back as quickly as possible. If, on the contrary, I
refute the doubt on grounds that hold for everyone, hence are universally
valid, but are convincing and assuring in such a way that no one else is in a
position to object against this, then this is really a categoricalrefutation,
refutatio categorical,} and this occurs for the sake of really bringing the
truth to the light of day and clearing away false cognitions as much as
possible.
Often scruples always remain in a cognition and cannot be cleared
away.
The development of scruples is a very beautiful science/ By its means a
203 scruple is, as it were, pulled out of the darkness, and then, after it is
properly placed in the light, it has to be refuted as a significant objection.
No more miserable condition for man can be thought, however, than
the condition that leaves us undecided. The condition of undecidedness,
particularly, however, when it affects our interest. This condition of undecidedness is far more troublesome than the condition of speculation.
Everything that holds us up and makes us inactive, leaves us in a certain
kind of inaction, is quite opposed to the essential determinations of the
soul. Man even prefers to know a future misfortune in advance rather
than remain uncertain in the supposition of it, suspended between fear
and hope.
Doctors are often themselves responsible for the cowardice of their
patients[;] they feed them in most cases with empty words and conditions,
fancies.
" "hinlänglich, und zu reichend."
' "Wiederwillen."
p "eine sehr schöne Wißenschaft."
160
Young people, in particular, are in most cases such that they do not at all
like to be in suspenso, for they are such that they always want to go further.
In all this uncertainly, however, a certain kind of certaintycan nonetheless
occur, namely, the certainty that all our cognition is very restricted and
limited, and consequently only quite imperfect and lacking.
Namely, we can always cognize the grounds of uncertainty with certainty and reliability[;] that is a certainty of subjective philosophy.
§ 177
Settled truths are those truths against which no further objection can be
made.
These include, e.g., the res judicatae,1 that is, things settled inforo' by a
legally binding judgment[.] Thus after a completed legal action it is, e.g., a
settled matter that when the judge issues his verdict, this or that man, e.g.,
must accordingly pay a certain designated sum of money to that man or
this.
All new truths whatsoever always find in the beginning very many
opponents, very much resistance[;] there must be a certain time necessary
and required for settling them, after one has investigated them better.
Thus it happened, e.g., in the beginning with the writings of Cartesius. In
the beginning they found very much opposition, and 30 years and more 204
went by without their truth being settled.
Through this settling of truth no new cognition is actually added to it,
but instead what happens is just that all other men cease judging concerning it, and subscribe to it. As long as there is controversy concerning a
thing, then, as long as disputes are exchanged by this side or the other, the
thing is not yet settled at all.
§178
Frequently we can have complete certainty of this or that thing, but the
grounds of the certainty are frequently such that one still notices much
uncertainty in the mode of inferring. E.g. The soul is immortal; this is
completely certain. But philosophy's grounds for it are not so evident that
one should be completely convinced by them. The philosophical form
thereof is still quite uncertain.
Every uncertainty is a ground for a legitimate doubt, since I still find it
possible to search for grounds for the opposite of the cognition.
The consciousness of the insufficiency of a ground for truth is at least
helpful toward accepting that it is still possible that there are still grounds
* things adjudicated.
' incourt.
161
for the opposite of the thing. Doubt in the proper sense is not yet present
in the uncertainty of a cognition.
The uncertainty of one thing or another makes doubt completely possible, however, in such a way that one has grounds for the opposite. Often,
from one's having seen and noticed that reason is very often erroneousf,]
there arises a kind of hatred of reason, misology, approximately of the
same kind as misanthropy[,] hatred of man, which arises from distrust of
the whole human race, which one draws from the observation of how litde
men act rightly.
"The autiior5 who teaches in his writingswhat will hold for perhaps over
a hundred years deserves, without doubt, the greatest thanks," says Terrasson.31 The world is still always moved by its prejudices, which that author
wanted to root out, until the world finally starts to reflect on this correctly
205 and, with the passage of time, gradually calms down and grants this.
We cannot always investigate the grounds of conflict, of discourse. It is
not good or advisable to argue over this or mat thing with people who have
themselves written great books and works about it; for we might infer that
it will not be so easy to bring them to die point where they will so readily
think lighdy of their own work of many years, etc., esteem it little, or
themselves refute it.
In an internal proof one is immediately conscious to himself of the
uncertainty in a cognition. An external proof, however, is the' consciousness of die uncertainty of a cognition, not immediately, but instead mediately, in accordance with the judgments of others. In some quaestiones of
reason such a plausibility can be met with and found that I simply cannot
withdraw my approval from it[;] but if I expound it to others, they nevertheless often have just the opposite opinion, and dien I become aware for die
first time that according to die minds and insights of others, my cognition
is not yet completely, undoubtedly certain.
In common speech die word doubt means any uncertainty, and in this
respect and this sense doubt is either dogmatic or skeptical. The former is a
doubt of decision, but the latter a doubt of retardation, of postponement.
From the former certainty arises, but from die latter closer investigation
and inquiry, in order to attain proper and undoubted certainty of cognition.
In dogmatic doubt we reject all inquiry and do not accept sometiiing
toward which we have, or believe ourselves to have, a grounded doubt. We
decide, in short, and say: In this matter there is no question of attaining
any certainty. Thus dogmatic doubt regards very many cognitions as if
nothing at all could be established or settied concerning them. A philosopher who makes the judgment concerning universal truths of reason that
one can bring diem to complete certainty and reliability, but who will have
' "Verfasser, undAutor."
' Reading "aber ist das" for "aber, das ist,das," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
162
nothing at all to do with the consideration of such truths of reason as are
or can be open to one or another doubt, is called a dogmaticus. The
mathematicus, e.g., is like this; all his proofs are at once decisive[;] he 206
expounds a proposition positively, even proves it to be so decisive^, [so] that
it is completely impossible for judgment not to occur.
The methodus dogmatica philosophiae" will thus consist in our attaining
full, sure certainty in all judgments, in not being satisfied with indecision,
and in leaving nothing undecided. By this dogmatic method, however, one
will never fully settle the actual certainty of a thing[;] one will not teach
truths in this way, but instead will quite often propagate errors instead by
seating oneself, as it were, on the judge's bench of human reason and
issuing the verdict that no certainty at all can be attained concerning this
or that cognition, that all inquiry will hence in every case be undertaken in
vain[;] and in this way, as it were, one sets limits and restrictions to the
human understanding.
All reflection, all efforts to provide oneself with true certainty concerning something and to attain conviction, are thereby completely removed,
and what can arise from this except ignorance, indeed, probably error?
The dogmatic spirit in philosophy is thus the proud language of the
ignorant, who like to decide everything and do not like to investigate anytiiing at all, whereas our understanding is quite inclined to examine everything first and to investigate it exactly before it accepts and maintains
anything, also to look around well first, without blindly rejecting something
that occurs to us. The dogmatists could be opposed to the dialecticians.
Cognitions are ist those whose certainty can be cognized apodeictically.
These are cognitions a priori, into which we have insight through mere
reason. We will never be able to attain an apodeictic certainty with testimony. Apodeictic judgments are judgments a priori, and cognitions of
this sort are dogmataL[;] mathematics, e.g., is of this sort.
There can be no apodeictic certainty at all in cognitions of experience.
It is not a pure impossibility that all those who talk to us much ofpraxisL in
thinking, acting, judging, inferring, neverdieless deceive us, without on
that account having to have bad intentions, however. Everything that is
apodeictically certain is capable of a dogmatic mode of cognition, but 207
everything else really only of a dialectical one.
The ancients divided their philosophers into dogmatists and skeptics,
searchers, investigators, speculators of truth, who always sought but never
could find it.
Furthermore, there were intellectual philosophers[,] among whom
Plato said:
"everything that we want to cognize well and have proper insight into must occur a
priori merely and solely through reason. The senses contain nothing but deception."
" dogmatic method of philosophy.
163
The sensuous philosophers,* on the other hand, among whom we
reckon Epicurus as the foremost, said on the contrary:
"Everything that we are in a position to cognize a priori through reason is nothing
but a chimera.Only the senses give real, true certainty."
These were joined, however, by a third, who made peace between these
2 heated, quarreling parties by shouting out: "I believe both equally little,
or not at all.""7
Neither the intellectual nor the sensitive has certainty. In the human
understanding there is nothing but confusion. And* from this arose then
formal skepticism/ which seems to originate from so famous and highly
esteemed a man as Socrates. When, namely, the dogmatists either wrangled among themselves or maintained one or another proposition with all
gravity and certainty, he listened to them in the beginning in complete
humility[;] but soon he began to ask them for advice, as a listener desirous
of learning, as it were, and as a pupil of the heated and pathetic dogmatists, since they disputed with one anotherf;] and he could thereby catch
them with their own words, and he knew how to confuse them in such a
way that in the end they completely contradicted themselves, and were
often made ridiculous before whole assemblies. He did this so often and
at such propitious moments that the enemies of the proud dogmatists
rejoiced in advance when Socrates visited their auditoria, and these dogmatists were in fear of him when he began to ask questions, as they had to
answer him, since he knew how to act like a pupil desirous of knowledge.
From this there finally arose among his followers a ruinous inclination to
doubt completely any and every dogmatic cognition and its certainty.
Pyrrho, however, can with right be regarded as the real founder and
208 disseminator of the skeptical sect. His non liquet,* which he uttered with
equal validity against the proud claims of the dogmatists, thus at least
often making them hesitate a great deal, as well as his careful and tireless"
efforts to investigate carefully all the propositions of the dogmatists, are
known to all.
If we reflect on the matter properly, however, philosophy has nonedieless gained far more from the sceptid than from the proud dogmatists:
although it is true, of course, that the former, through misuse, finally
degenerated into bitter sarcasm. Skepticism, however, or the method of
skeptical doubt, where one establishes a distrust in oneself, considers the
grounds for and against the cognition that one has, and in this way strives
"Sensual Philosophen."
Ak, "nichts"; MS, "nicht."
Ak, "Verwirrung, und"; MS, "Verwirrung. Und" (KI, Ixxi).
"der förmliche Scepticismus."
It is not clear.
Ak, "unermüdende"; MS, "unermüdete" (KI, Ixxi).
164
to come to complete certainty concerning it, this is the kathartikon, reason's best means of purgation. This skepticism hinders errors as much as
possible, leads man to more inquiry, and is the path to the truth of the
matter (although not all at once and suddenly, of course, but instead
slowly and gradually through more and closer examination).
The doubt of postponement is thus actually a certain mark of the
maturity of reason and of experience in the truth of cognition.
But if we were to ask in this connection which method of philosophizing will be the most appropriate and the best in academies, and which will
please the most, the dogmatic or the skeptical?
Then we would necessarily have to answer: the dogmatic.
If a learned man steps up here and establishes somethingdogmatically
concerning this or that cognition, then nothing can be easier for the
listener[;] he need not examine anything, investigate anything, but instead
only fix in his memory the little that the teacher says and expounds to him.
In this way he remains completely at rest and in comfort[;] he need only
memorize; whereas doubt about cognitions is far less comfortable, but
instead is far more unsettling, and requires one's own reflection and
investigation.
Doubt can thus be divided into
A. academic
B. skeptical doubt.
The school of Plato, the great dogmaticus, was called the Academy. 209
Academic doubt is quite distinct from skeptical doubt.
1. "The academic doubter proved and demonstrated per definitionem that
nothing could properly be proved, nothing defined, which was, however, a
contradictio in adjecto, and this was dogmatic, seeming doubt."c
2. The Pyrrhonic, i.e., skeptical doubter says, on the other hand, that to each
and every one of our judgments, or at least to most, another judgment may
always be opposed''which maintains exactly the opposite of what is contained
in the former judgment; this was actually to be regarded more as a kind of
very fine and outstanding observation than'' as a reprehensible doubt. And it
would actually have been desirable for one to employ this observation correctly and carefully; very advantageous consequences would certainly have
arisen from this for the whole of human cognition.
But how? Is it not a contradictio, to establish something in the case of an
error, and to be a dogmatic doubter?
Answer. Both can quite well co-exist. Dogmatic doubt is always comAk, "adjecto"; MS, "objecto" (KI, Ixix).
' Reading "der Dogmatische, scheinende Zweifel" for "der Dogmatisch scheinende
Zweifel."
4 "entgegen setzen, und opponiren."
' Reading "Beobachtung, denn als"for"Beobachtung, als,"with Hinske (KI,Ixxiii).
165
bined with persuasion of the certainty that nothing at all can be established or maintained concerning this or that cognition.
Hence dogmatic doubt consists in nothing but judging that one can
never attain complete certainty with a cognition, and that all inquiry,
furthermore, is thus always conducted in vain and for nothing.
Skeptical doubt, on the other hand, consists in being conscious of the
uncertainty with a cognition and thus in being compelled to inquire into it
more and more, so that finally one may nonetheless attain certainty with
the help of careful investigations. The former, then, the dogmatist, rejects
certainty completely and altogether. The latter, the skeptic, however,
searches for it little by little. The origin of the expression skepticism is
properly as follows[:] axejrceaocu/This word means in Greek: to inquire,
scrutari, investigare, indagare.1 Thus the scepticus constantly inquires,
he examines and investigates, he distrusts everything, but never without a
210 ground. In this he resembles a judge, who weighs the grounds for something as well as against it, and who listens to the plaintiff as well as the
defendant, prior to and before deciding the matter and passing judgment.
He postpones his final judgment quite long before he dares to settle
something fully. These were the ancient and pure attributes of scepticismus
and of an unadulterated skeptic.
Skepticism in the beginning was actually very rational, but its followers
spoiled it and earned it a bad reputation.
These latter were so subtle* that they even went so far as to say that
everything is uncertain, even that it is uncertain that everything is uncertain. That was actually a kind of purgative of human reason, which was
such that after it cleansed our understanding completely of all impurities,
i.e., of all false delusion, prejudices, incorrect judgments, it disposed of
itself in turn.
In fact, nothing is more harmful to the learned world than universal rest
and agreement and peace, however; at least this always hinders improvement and increase of learnedness[;] here it is almost approximately just as
with the English, who, when the court stands in agreement with its subjects and is fully at one with itself, immediately think there is danger and
believe they have lost all their freedom.
A universal resolve to doubt everything is of no use whatsoever; it is
wholly absurd[;] but there are few men, or we could probably even say none,
who would be inclined to such a childish and harmful addiction to doubt.
True skepticism, at all events, is a thing of great usefulness, and as such
it is nothing other than an exact, careful investigation of all dogmata that
are put forth as apodeictic, which, insofar as they actually are so and stand
^ Reading"axinxEoSai" instead of "axEjruo^ai," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
g to examine, to investigate,to searchout.
* "Subtil."
166
the test, shine forth and strike the eye in all their valeur,' in all their
strength, only after this test.
Skeptical method is a true investigatingof truth by means of postponement, in that one does not accept7 or reject anything at once, but instead
first lets there be dispute about it. We are really not at all inclined by our
nature to postponement. In our times people called skeptics are in part
such as do not in the least deserve the name of philosopher (e.g., a
Voltaire)[,] in part such as are not real academici but instead merely display
a skeptical method in itself and, as it were, affect it, e.g., a Hume. Among 211
the modern skeptics, however, we can reckon Bayle,32 etc.
Among us, then, the name of the skeptic is in most cases now regarded as
something hatefulf;] one thinks, namely, of one who does nothing, who
devotes himself to nothing but striving to overthrow the most undeniable
and most certain truths; someone is held to be a dogmatic doubter, then,
who believes that he is not in a position to judge about anything, and that
there is no matter on which one can attain complete certainty, which nothing can topple. Previously, however, an honest skeptic was nothing but
someone who postpones his judgment until he has had opportunity and
time to take this or that matter under consideration, and who only then
ventures to infer whether a cognition is to be taken as true or is rather to be
rejected as false. The skeptical method is directly opposed to the dogmatic.
The method of judging, however, where one doubts, namely, more than
one decides, where one thus believes that our cognitions can be false
instead of true, is suspensio, or that kind of distrust toward the cognition we
have where we likewise do not actually settle anything, but where we
nevertheless judge and first investigate whether the grounds for the cognition or those against it have the upper hand.
With this method we collect the grounds of approval or of rejection, but
we do not settle anything, we do not decide at all. This kind of suspension
is thus directly opposed to dogmatic pride. The dogmaticus asks: is something true or not? He decides immediately, then[;] but the one who suspends his judgment, who does not trust himself much at all, he always
inquires, examines, investigates everything beforehand, in order to discover by this means the path to truth and to attain genuine true insight.
Human nature is actually far more inclined to decide than always to
examine, and to settle rather than always to investigate. For we are not at
all satisfied when we have to leave something uncompleted, especially in
our cognition, but instead we want to settle everything, so that in case the
need occurs we can recur to a completely certain and reliable cognition. 212
Our understanding is actually more satisfied by decision[;]* we believe,
' French: value, worth.
' Reading "annehmet" for"nennet."
* "Decision, und Entscheidung."
167
namely, that we have at least gained something thereby, with which we can
settle several cognitions.
The dogmatic mode of philosophizing is thus directly opposed to and
contradistinguished from the problematic mode of philosophizing.
In the former, one settles everything, but in the latter one does not
decide at all, but instead one postpones his judgments until one has
properly sought out the grounds and the opposing grounds, and then one
can make a judgment.
In physics above all one must philosophize problematically, and every
cautious learned man will without doubt make use of this mode of philosophizing. The doubt in the problematic mode of philosophizing, however,
is either a skeptical doubt, an inquiring, investigating, examining one, or a
dogmatic, settling, deciding doubt.
The history of philosophy, when it comes to this point, namely, to the
point of the origin of the sect of skeptics, always refers in most cases to
Socrates. The sophists, who in ancient times, out of vain ambition and
fancied science, believed themselves to have the right to decide everything, and who defended a thing from whatever side simply pleased them,
were hateful to Socrates, since he held, and publicly maintained, that they
were merely seeming wise men' (which is really all they were, too).
He judged that there were many things we do not need to know[;]
hence he also had the motto, which was sufficient testimony of his
philosophy: "'quod supra nos, nihil ad nos.nm Thus he established that our
best cognition is to come to know ourselves, that man is the proper
object of all philosophy. Hence he accepted nothing but what he had
examined. He did not give his approval blindly to any cognition, but
instead inquired and examined.
When someone was inclined, therefore, to decide something immediately, he showed him the opposing grounds and difficulties that would
make it necessary for him to suspend his judgment. This inclination to
decide nothing without examination did not derive in his case from any
213 pride, but instead from a high degree of modesty, since he did not place
too much trust in himself but instead actuallyhad a kind of distrust toward
all his cognitions. And he also impressed this modesty above all on all his
followers, although it did not stay with them long, for his immediate pupil
Plato soon began to become somewhat more dogmatic[;] and from him
arose and originated the Academic sect, which was opposed to the skeptical sect.
These latter endeavored to philosophize problematically, but the former,
the dogmatists, decided everything[;] their whole philosophy consisted in
deciding.
' "Scheinweisen."
™ What is beyond us is nothing to us.
168
Pyrrho was the first to bring the skeptical sect into favor, and his followers were therefore called Pyrrhonists, too.
This sect did not really doubt all truths, but instead it lengthened
investigation and postponed decision. Thus they proved through doubt
that the grounds for decision were not yet complete, and thus they led the
dogmatists, who wanted to decide everything, to the path of caution.
The skeptics, however, are also called zetetid" seekers, and investigators, and this because they sought and inquired. With all propositions,
then, they will neither doubt them decisivelynor decisively take something
to be true and accept it.
Thus the zeteticus is not one who has the maxim to reject everything
whatsoever and to decide positive^ concerning everything at all, or to
maintain it blindly, but instead is one who reflects on his cognitions and
examines them.
Pyrrho had a certain motto for his sect: non liquet."
To anyone who maintained his propositions with the greatest and most
settled gravity he shouted out in opposition, Non liquet, It is not yet settled,
and then he began to expound his speech against it.
A skilled and learned way of humbling some proud dogmatist and of
showing his weak side. This is a certain motto for every pure reason. One
must not accept anything at once, but instead examine, and investigate the
objects, and consider. This sect of Pyrrhonists, however, departed so far
from their founder that it was later accepted that Pyrrho himself had
completely denied the certainty of any and every dogmatum.
That Pyrrho denied many dogmata and that he established a just and
well-considered mistrust, that further he rejected in particular many rational judgments, is indisputable and not to be denied[;] but that he 214
denied each and every dogmaL, that is utterly false. One who accepts no
dogmata^ cannot teach any morality. In any case, there are certain, so to
speak, eternal principles of our reason, which cannot be disputed at all.
But Pyrrho was also accused in addition of doubting all empirical judgments and not trusting them. But this is nothing but a fabrication, which
has no ground. Pyrrho was a very wise man[;] he would have been a fool,
however, if he had wanted to reject all empirical judgments, whichever
they might be; in the beginning, then, a Pyrrhonist did nothing but moderate his judgment, but afterward the skeptics admittedly sought to place
everything in uncertainty[;] they strove to show that in all our cognitions
there can be no certainty at all. And thus there arose sceptidsmus problematicus et dogmaticus.p The former doubted, to be sure, but first it investigated, and by means of this investigation it wanted to attain certainty. The
" From the Greek, ^T|TT]Tt>t05, disposed to search or inquire.
° It is not clear.
p problematic skepticism and dogmatic skepticism.
169
latter decided, on the other hand, and accepted that a complete certainty
was not to be attained in any matter.
This inclination to want to take nothing as certain arises actually from
nothing other than a desire for completion. He who saw that in many
matters we cannot attain certainty, who doubts the truth of many things
and dogmata^ and did not accept them until an examination had occurred,
saw it as better to doubt everything and to dispute the truth of each and
every principle by putting forth opposing grounds.
We actually have no writings remaining from Pyrrho himself, except
that Diogenes Laertius puts forth something from them. In the meantime,
this much is certain: that one imputes* to him, as to Epicurus, far more
than he actually did. It is said of him, e.g., that he denied the certainty of
all experiences, that he therefore walked directly into swamps and morasses, that he feared neither the running of horses nor deep chasms or
ditchesf;] and add to these disparaging reports that he is said to have lived
to be 90 years old, as an obvious proof that all such charges as had been
invented about him must be false[;] for with such boldness he would
certainly have lost his life earlier.
215 Carneades, the founder of the last academic school[,] deviated from
Pyrrho's doctrines very much and actually maintained that one could not
attain a proper certainty, or come to certain truth, in any matter.
Skepticism, however, is either logicus, logical. This includes, e.g., the
diallelon that truth is supposed to consist in the agreement of a cognition
with itself.
Many of the arguments of the skeptics had and received their names
often from the terminus medius of the Syllogismus. Thus one of their arguments, e.g., is called the liar, which ran thus: if you say you lie, and in
saying this you speak the truth, then you speak the truth by lying, atqui'
you say you lie, and by saying this you then speak the truth by lying. But
the right conclusion should be: ergoL you speak the truth by saying you lie.
Or skepticism is also physicus, physical, where one casts doubt on the
certainty of all physical laws, e.g., the possibility of movement. Thus the
ancient sceptici had a certain argument, which they named, also on account
of the medius terminus, the Achilles. They inferred namely thus: if the
running Achilles were to have a race with a tortoise with a mile's headstart, and even if Achilles were in a position to run a hundred times faster
than the tortoise, he would still never be able to overtake the tortoise.
The grounds that skepticism used in defense of this argument were:
that all numbers were divisible in inßnitum, that however fast Achilles ran,
therefore, there would still always be a spatium, although very small,
between him and the tortoise.
"imputiret, und aufredet."
but.
170
They inferred here merely through reason, without recurring to experience, for then they would have found that Achilles must necessarily overtake the tortoise in i vi miles, provided only that he could run 1000 times
faster than the tortoise. Furthermore, skepticism was vel moralis,' and
this consisted in maintaining that all the rules of virtue are fashions, or
customs and practices in actions that men undertake. Thus, e.g., close
marriages were not forbidden at all in Egypt as they now are among us[;]
furthermore, e.g., among some Negroes the greatest, most outstanding, 216
and final service of love that children who love their parents dearly can
show them is that they will put them to death when they become old.
Among the Spartans, e.g., thievery was not punished, provided only that it
could take place in such a way as not to be publicly noticeable, and
stealing was even allowed, provided only that it took place in secret.
Skepticism, furthermore, was vel historicus,' historical, which consisted in believing that all stories and reports, even tales of ancient times,
have to be held to be uncertain[,] fabricated, and mythical."
Skeptics of still another kind had the custom of always talking much
and conversing about the uncertainty of the senses. They denied straight
away the certainty of each and every experience. Thus there was, e.g., a
skeptic who, after he had frequently, on many grounds, maintained that
one could not trust the senses at all, wanted to persuade his friend of this
quite certainly and undeniably by saying to him: Every day I have in my
larder many supplies, but when I go there, count the supplies, and return
the next day, the supplies are always fewer than they were yesterday, a
certain and incontrovertible proof that the senses must deceive. His
friend, who well saw what must lie behind this, advised him to guard the
key to his larder as much as possible, most carefully. The skeptic's servant, however, who was very sly, soon learned how to get hold of the key,
and under this pretence continued depleting his master's supplies, until
one time his master nonetheless caught him in the act and recommended
the rightful punishment for him for his thievery, but had to learn in this
matter that one can, indeed, trust the senses.
Skepticism of this sort could well be called dogmaticus, for the skeptici
were themselves dogmatists, in that they doubted things, etc., but nevertheless believed they had a right that every man should give approval to
their proofs and accept their doubts. Thus they contradicted themselves,
for they said that everything is uncertain, without distinction, and nonetheless they maintained their propositions and attributed to them an infallible
certainty. They had, e.g., the proposition: Everything is uncertain, and in
such a way that it is even uncertain that everything is uncertain[.]
' either moral.
' or historical.
" Reading "Fabelhaft halten zu müßen glaubet" for "Fabelhaft zu seyn glaubet," with
Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
171
217 As for what concerns modern times in respect of scepticismus, the dogmatic method was very common at the beginning of the Reformation. At
that time philosophy was held and considered to be a necessary support
for religion[;] hence not many doubts or opposing grounds were lodged
against the certainty of philosophical propositions, but instead these were
taught and established. After a free mode of thought had later slipped in
in many nations, however, people began, with more and greater resoluteness and certainty, to doubt the truth of manypreviously unassailed propositions, and not just to believe and to accept everything at once. Soon
people strove to resist the proud dogmatists in something and to show the
groundlessness" of many of their propositions. In most recent times, David
Hume is especially known as a scepticus who had an overwhelming, indeed,
a somewhat extravagant inclination to doubt. His writings, which appeared before the learned world under the title, "Philosophical Inquiries,"
and were also called "Miscellaneous Writings,'^ contained political articles, essays on literature, moral and also metaphysical articles[;] but they
all tended toward to skepticism. In these writings of Hume is to be found
a gentle, calm, unprejudiced examination. In them he considers, namely,
first of all one side of a thing; he searches for all possible grounds for it,
and expounds them in the best oratorical style. Then he takes up the other
side, presents it for examination, as it were, completely without partisanship, expounds again all the opposing grounds with just the same eloquence, but at the end and in conclusion he appears in his true form as a
real skeptic[;] he complains about the uncertainty of all our cognition
whatsoever, shows how little these can be trusted, and finally he doubts
instead of inferring and settling which of the two cognitions is true and
which false. He would, however, certainly be one of the best authors, and
one of those most worthy of being read, if only he did not have the
preponderant inclination to doubt everything, but instead wanted to seek
to attain a true certainty by means of the examination and investigation of
cognitions.
Cardanus, in his book De vanitate scientarium,^ also expresses scepticismus and maintains, as it were, that everything is uncertain.
Voltaire is the scepticus of the modern skeptics of our times. His
218 scepticismus, however, is far more harmful than it is useful. He expounds
neither groundsfor nor grounds against the matter. He inquires and tests
nothing at all, but instead doubts without any proof that a cognition is not
to be trusted. His grounds are thus nothing but illusory grounds, which
can deceive a simple man, to be sure, but never an acute and reflective
learned man. And just for this reason Voltaire is especially dangerous for
the great horde and for the common man. For he provides the common
man with wholly false grounds for doubting this or that thing. But if one
" "den Ungrund."
172
wants closer instruction in the scepticismus of modern times, then one can
read with great profit the writing that Haller published under the tide:
Examination of the sea that doubts everything.^ Also, the writings of Hume
mentioned above are actually, in a certain way, to be recommended too.
§ 181
In this paragraphus the author speaks of opinion in general. It is contradistinguished from persuasion, however. In both there are uncertain cognitions, but in persuasion one holds these to be certain. In opinion, on the
other hand, one does not hold them to be certain. Therefore we must
strive above all to distinguish persuasion from conviction. Someone who
holds something to be an opinion cannot also hold it to be a persuasion,
and actually errs as soon as he does so. Persuasion is thus always reprehensible, since in this case one takes something to be true on insufficient
grounds.
The distinction between persuasion and conviction is, however, rather
difficult, and hence is very seldom determined rightly. This is because one
has perhaps never experienced a true conviction, but only the illusion of it.
Opinion, however, is really not a mistake, but only an imperfect cognition, a lack, since something in our judgment does not have sufficient
grounds.
We can always put forth many opinions without thereby erring, if only
we do not hold them to be convictions. The crowd does this quite often.
Although a cognition is completely false, opinion about it can nevertheless
be completely certain, and can agree with the rules of the understanding
and of reason. E.g., if someone in common life selects a servant who is of
good parents and has a good upbringing, then he is of the opinion that he 219
is good, that one can trust in him. Here reason is present and applied,
although the opposite thereof can very often occur and my cognition can
be false. Wolff was of the completely reasonable opinion that there are
inhabitants on the moon, for at that time discoveries were not as numerous as now, when it has been seen that the moon has no atmosphere.
Opinion can often be false as to matter, although it is true as to form,
and conversely, it can be true as to matter but false as to form[;] in the first
case it is false, but in the second always true.
If my cognition agrees with the constitution of the thing itself, then it is
true. But if it is contrary to the constitution of the thing, then it is false. An
opinion can, however, be quite true as to form, reasonable and thorough,
even though it does not agree as to matter with the constitution of the
thing.
An opinion is never a certainty, the opposite can always occur[;] nonetheless it can also quite often be reasonable and right.
One obtains an opinion for something from certain grounds that one
173
cognizes. The outcome of the thing, however, teaches us whether our
opinion was true or false as to matter. Whether the form of our opinion
was right, however, this the eventus" of the thing cannot really show us.
The principal mistake in our cognitions consists in what is formal and
not in what is material in the cognitions. One can hold something to be
true in accordance with every form of reason, and have a grounded opinion for something, when the data that one now has for the thing outweigh
the grounds for the opposite, although the outcome of the thing first
actually teaches one whether the opinion was true as to matter and
whether the eventus was other than one opined.
Each and every opinion is quite changeable. Today one can have more
grounds for the opinion, tomorrow more against it, whereupon one must
change one's opinion at once and accept another, often one opposed to it,
which cannot in fact be at all detrimental for a true philosopher.
220 Hypotheses are a completely special kind of philosophical opinion. Not
all philosophical opinions are hypotheses, however, but only a few. They
do not serve to explain the appearances of the world, but instead only to
explain something in general, which may arise from reason, or from experience, or from appearance.
A hypothesis is an opinion concerning the truth of a ground based on its
sufficiency for the consequence. If, namely, I hold something to be true a
priori on account of its grounds, then this is nothing other than an opinion.
But if, on the other hand, I cognize the ground from the sufficiency of the
consequences for the ground, then this is also an opinion, but not apriori,
but instead a posteriori, and thus a hypothesis. A hypothesis is, as it were,
a presupposition. Thus a doctor makes hypotheses when he cures the
sick[;] he has to subsume everything under hypotheses, and see whether
the consequences that he now has before his eyes follow therefrom.
If all the consequences that follow from an assumed hypothesis^ are true
and agree with what is given, then it is not an opinion anymore but instead
a certainty.
It is a demonstrated truth, furthermore[;] but since we are not in a
position, or very seldom, to draw out each and every consequence, then in
most cases they are only pure opinions[;] hence we must say that if all the
consequences that we have been able to draw from a hypothesis-^ are true,
then I have great cause to conclude that the hypothesis itself is certain and
true. If a hypothesis is strengthened by other things of which we are assured
besides its sufficiency for its consequences, then it is confirmed. A hypothesis subsidiaries is a hypothesis that presupposes a new hypothesis. But the
more I must assume in it, the less steadfast it is. The more unity there is in
the hypothesis, the better it is, for otherwise in most cases fabrication gets
added. And in this waythere arises a philosophical novel. A novelof reason,
174
as, e.g., of Cartesius, etc., etc. A world-system based on pure phantoms of
the brain. But let us note the rule: I can of course invent things in order to
philosophize, but in philosophizing itself I cannot invent.
Every presupposition has infinite consequences, however. But something is certain in a relative way when the grounds for approval exceed all
grounds for the opposite[;] this is then a comparative certainty. Something 221
is certain absolute^, however, of which the opposite is impossible or
absurd. Two presuppositions are one and the same representation, and
not at all different, if they are such that from the one the very same
consequences flow as from the other.
Thus the Copernican system is a hypothesis. One can still represent the
opposite as possible, however hard that is, and as easy as this system is,
and as much as it accords with reason and agrees with all the phenomena
of the heavens. -
With all hypotheses one must necessarily secure acceptance and certainty for them in such a way that they can be confirmed and derived not
merely a posteriori through relation to their consequences, but also apriori
through the nexusL, that is, through relation to their grounds.
From the sufficiency of a ground for a given consequence it can never
be inferred with full truth that this is the true ground of the consequence,
for this is only an opinion. There is a ground of possibility here, but not of
certainty, for a consequence can often arise from several grounds, and can
originate from more than one ground. The more sufficient a ground is,
however, the more will one infer that it is the ground of the consequence.
For all hypotheses are posited arbitrarily. Namely, I assume something and
see whether something is sufficient for deriving therefrom a certain consequence or not.
If a ground suffices for all the determinations that are contained in a
certain given consequence, no more, but also no fewer[;] if it is adequate,
then, so that from it can be inferred neither fewer determinations (and
thus it is complete) nor more (and thus it is precise), then it is the true
ground, since it is such as it ought to be.
It is impossible for there to be more grounds than are adequate for a
consequence. Grounds that are distinct from one another cannot also agree
with one another in all cases. Grounds that agree in all consequences,
however, are not different grounds but one and the same ground.
If a ground suffices for some of what is contained in the consequence,
then according to logical rules there is an opinion that the ground is true.
If the ground suffices for several determinations of the consequence, then
the opinion is that much more probable.
Until finally, when the ground suffices for all the determinations but 222
also not for more determinations than are contained in the consequence,
then there is a true ground, and then hypothesis ceases. The ground
becomes a theory. A certainty.
175
If a consequence is given to me and I am supposed to find its ground,
then this is a hypothesis. If a ground is given to me, however, and I am
supposed to derive its consequences, then this is an opinion, to be sure,
but not a hypothesis. With a hypothesis the consequences are given but the
ground is invented.
One of the most famous hypotheses is the Copernican. Copernicus
assumed that the sun stands still and the planets move about it, and saw
whether from this all the appearances of the heavenly bodies can be
explained; later, however, his hypothesis becomes a true opinion and a
complete system, which deserves to be approved by all. If it is asked why
all bodies have just this inclination to fall toward the earth, then here the
consequence is present, and the ground has to be found.
Cartesius assumed that bodies made certain vortices[;] others assumed
that these vortices crossed each other, and from this they thus sought to
explain that bodies fall, and always toward the center of the earth.
In metaphysica there are many hypotheses. The proof of the existence of
God is at first an hypothesis. One assumes a being that is the most perfect
among all others and then investigates whether grounds of explanations
can be derived from this for that of which nature, experience, and the
creatures here on earth teach us.
Plato and Malebranche assumed it as a hypothesis that man stands in a
wholly special connection with the deity and saw whether they would be
able to explain from this the consequences into which they had insight.
Hypotheses actually have very great value, however, and can never be
fully banned from human cognition. All judges make hypotheses, which
they often reject again on better investigation. Hypotheses are the path
toward theory, and frequently toward a truth completely opposed to it.
By means of hypotheses one does not always find what one intends, but
instead frequently something else[;] one tries, one tests, assumes something, and investigates whether from it one can explain the known conse-
223 quences or not; if the first occurs, then one accepts the hypothesis^,* if the
latter occurs, one rejects it.
Since from the sufficiency of a ground for the consequence the truth of
the ground can be inferred, and this ground is fabricated, it follows from
this: The more that is fabricated in a ground, the more that follows from it
licite,* and the newer it is. And the more the hypotheses that must be
accepted in order to explain something, the more fabrication takes place.
In the case of some inferences one must fabricate many hypotheses
subsidiariae. If we have consequences and fabricate the ground for them,
then it can frequently be that we have still more consequences than the
ground suffices for.
* Ak, "an. findet"; MS, "an, findet" (KI, Ixix).
' permissibly, legitimately.
176
Thus we must fabricate new grounds, and these new grounds are
nothing but hypotheses subsidiariae.
These are actually opposed to true philosophy, however, and they show
effrenis fingendi licentia* If I am to invent everything, then I want to explain
everything. Unity is therefore a principal attribute of hypotheses, namely,
that one assumes a ground which suffices for explaining all determinations and consequences of the thing that we cognize, without, however,
needing to help oneself to hypotheses subsidiariae and the assumption of
these.
The unity of hypotheses is a major ground [for establishing] that the
ground is the true one, and that there can be no other from which one
could explain just as many consequences.
It is also a principal ground of the truth of a hypothesis if one shows that
the ground that one has fabricated for the sake of the sufficiency of the
consequences deserves to be accepted on the basis of other causes. Here
one shows from other grounds, namely, that what was fabricated must be
acceptedf;] thus one confirms the truth of the hypothesis.
All holding-to-be-true derives from a double combination, namely,
either because the ground is sufficient for the derivation of all consequences, or because it agrees and is, so to speak, aequivoce" with other
grounds that have a certain similarity to it. With all hypotheses, therefore,
we will first show the sufficiency ofthefictio historicab for their consequences, and also the agreement of the fiction with other grounds, so that
there are still other grounds from which consequences can be derived.
Hypotheses must first, as inferences, be probable, but at the same time it 224
must also be possible to confirm them through other grounds. E.g., he
who wants to explain a thunderstorm assumes an electrical kind of matter
in the air and shows afterward from other grounds that there actually must
be a sulphurous and electrical matter in the air. On the one hand, hypotheses have something really quite detrimental to philosophy, insofar as they
give allowance to fabrication. But on the other hand, they are also very
beneficial, namely, ifthefictiones are heuristic or have as their purpose the
fabrication of something.
In philosophy, hypothesis is thus actually a whollyindispensable method
of reason and of our understanding^] all hypotheses must be assumed
wholly problematically[;] consequently one must not be obstinate about any
hypothesis^ and hold fast to it, so that one cannot quicklylet it go when one
sees its falsity or uncertainty. Many attempts at fabrication are often completely in vain, in that one does not discover any truth thereby. Thus
hypotheses also have the disadvantagethat if they are artfully devised and if
* unbridled license to fabricate (reading "effrenis" instead of "effrunua," with Hinske, KI,
Ixxii).
the same in meaning.
historical fiction (reading "Fictionis" instead of "Fictiones," with Hinske, KI, Ixxii).
177
one has noted in addition their agreement with many consequences, they
take root in our understanding^] and if one immediately thereafter has
insight into their falsity, it is nevertheless not so easy to be rid of them[.]
Thus, e.g., if this or that hypothesis were sufficient for new and correct
consequences, and if it is only one, e.g., the hundredth, that contradicts the
ground, then one rejects this one, although it is evidently true, rather than
getting rid of the hypothesis that seems so good. It is therefore quite sad if
an age is dominated by nothing but hypotheses which, however, are false,
and which thus do not suffice to discover the true ground. Such hypotheses
do more harm than good, for they do not suffice to explain everything,and if
in addition one assumes them as true, one acquires only false cognitions
and representations instead of true ones. He who will not get rid of false
hypotheses, because he has contrived them and they seem so probable to
him, is like a man who has raised a child with much effort and care and who
afterward does not want to reject it, so as not to lose all his work, effort, and
expense.
Nevertheless, such hypotheses, in which nothing but false hypotheses
are fused together, serve to get true hypotheses fabricated in subsequent
225 ages, for one who is familiar with all possible false paths cannot possibly
fail to find the right path at last. The remaining propositions which our
author puts forth in
§ 182 et 183
are for the most part tautological and hence do not deserve closer investigation or explanation (the author frequently proceeds thus). When he says
in the yth rule, § 183, that when one has not fabricated far too many
opinions, we can observe further that there is much that can be a perfection as to quality, but not a perfection as to quantity, namely, if it exceeds a
certain degree, which constitutes perfection.
But this degree is hard, indeed, almost impossible to determine[.] It
requires us to say, e.g., that one ought not to be too candidf;] the art
consists in determining quite exactly the degree of candor and of reticence that one must not exceed, provided one wants to be not too candid
and not too reticent.
There are innumerable deceptions in morals[;] rules are given that say
nothing more than what one has long known[;] this is nothing new for our
understanding, then.
Certainty is either
A. comparative or also
B. apodeictic.
Comparative certainty is the relation of the grounds of the holding-tobe-true to the grounds of the opposite.
178
Apodeictic certainty, however, is absolute and consists in the relation of
the grounds of the holding-to-be-true to the sufficient ground.
History is certain merely comparative^, never apodeictically. Morals,
however, and therein the^MS natumle in particular, contains many apodeictic certainties.
Also distinct from apodeictic certainty is mathematical certainty in intuition, which is evident. Mathematics expounds its propositions
1. discursively
2. intuitively.
Neither moral, physical, nor even metaphysical propositions can be
mathematically certain.
Even though they are apodeictically certain, evidence is in all cases 226
certainly lacking. The term arbitrary truths amounts to nothing, for can
truth also be false? What a contradictory expression!
A proposition is, however
1. true
2. false
3. arbitrary.
and then it is not settled whether it is the latter or the former; that is, it can
be true, but also false. I cannot form" the object arbitrarily, but I can
arbitrarily dispose'' the subject as is most comfortable for me[;] I can
cognize the object, and make the object comprehensible by me in the most
comfortable' way.
Everything that is mediately certain is provable. What is immediately
certain is unprovably certain, i.e., it is so undeniable that it needs no
means for certainty or for proof.
Proof, as a means to apodeictic certainty, is demonstration. Proof, as a
means to comparative certainty, is probation/
A mathematical demonstration, however, is also intuitive, evident. It
speaks of the universal in individuo. Who can comprehend that? Just as
little as we can comprehend that we can see everything with our eyes,
although they are so small. We always see objects that strike our eyes,
without however in the least wondering, how does that happen?
§184
In this paragraphus the author says one should guard against each and every
false cognition, one should avoid illusory conviction or illusory persuasion.
' "bilden."
d "disponiren."
' "Commodeste, undBequemlichste."
f "Probation.'"
179
But everyone knows this already[;] he would have said something excellent if he had put forth the marks by which persuasion can be distinguished from conviction.
Persuasion does not consist in material falsehood but instead in false
form, since one holds an opinion to be a complete certainty. The matter
itself can always be true, but this is not the manner, the way, to attain
truth.
In the case of persuasion one need not err as to the object, but one errs
227 as to form. Since one holds the grounds for opinionf,] for holding-to-betrue based on insufficient grounds, to be grounds for certainty based on
sufficient grounds.
In fact, however, we always have only a theory of morals, a speculation
concerning the moral behavior^ of men, and not an actual, practical morals. Therefore no one can demand, either, that one should put forward the
notae in which false persuasion is distinct from conviction in the true
sense. This is still to be discovered. We have likewise only a theoretical
logic, and not at all a practical one.
Some persuasion arises from logical grounds, some from aesthetic
grounds that do not derive from the understanding or from reason but
instead arise out of a certain inclination. Often we are not indifferent
about finding a matter true or false, and then there is a strong ground that
we will be persuaded of a cognition. Man in general is subject to very
many illusions[;] they play with him as with a ball. The one who can most
easily be persuaded, however, is one who is very easily inclined to be
moved to one or another affect.
The great horde, the crowd, the common man is thus in most cases
persuaded quite easily, and most easily, by someone who understands the
art of taking people in. He who can be easily persuaded, however, can also
be easily moved to an affect. The two are thus combined with one another
almost inseparably.
§185
Science (which really does not belong here, and whose consideration the
author has brought in here wrongly and in a certain way inappropriately)
can be opposed to supposition and also to opinions. Tobelieve something, or
to opine, is quite distinct from to know. For to know means to hold something to be true with sufficient certainty and grounds, so that no doubt
remains or can remain.
As for what concerns the degrees of holding-to-be-true, they are the
following:
1 "das moralische Sittliche verhalten."
180
1. to opine, or holding-to-be-true based on any insufficient ground, which nevertheless has more importance than the ground of the opposite, which I cognize
and into which I have insight.
2. to believe, or to hold something to be true to such a degree that it is sufficient 228
for action and for deciding to act.
3. to know, or to cognize the truth sufficiently.
The [German] word [for] to knowh is the origin or root of [the German
word for] certainty.' But certainty we have already explained above. A
science, however, is nothing other than a cognition, through which we
know something. The [German] word [for] science7 is contradistinguished
from art[;] hence in common life we also commonly say, this is not a
science but an art, and conversely. E.g., this happens with riddles[;] one
cries out, this is not science but instead an art (a great distinction).
There are actions for which a certain art, and on the other hand again
there are certain actions for which science, is required and necessary. But
something is called an art (to separate these concepts) for which a specific
perfection ofpraxisL is required. Something is called a science, however, for
which a specific perfection of theory is necessary. Every art involves a
practical skill in acting. The practical skill that one has in art cannot be
attained, however, merely by rules and by particular, certain precepts, but
instead one must also have a particular skill. Furthermore, science is
opposed to critique. Every theoretical cognition is either a doctrine or a
critique. Critique, however, is in fact nothing other than a species of
theoretical (hence not practical) cognition concerning any product that
there is, which shows us the rules according to which this product is
developed.* Doctrine, however, is that theoretical cognition in which one
comes across the grounds for how a matter can be developed,' or states
the rules according to which a good product can be produced.
A critique is actually not a science, for otherwise we might be able to
produce good products ourselves at once. But with critique this happens
only after a long time, when one gradually learns to apply the cognized
rules to oneself. In common usage, the word science is often used falsely,
and one involves other concepts with it than this word actually contains.
§ 189 229
In the case of certainty it is not the truth of the thing we cognize that is
necessary, but rather the holding-to-be-true. The greater the probability
"reißen."
"Gewißheit."
"Wissenschaft."
"ausgeübt."
"ausgeübt."
181
of a thing, the more the understanding is necessitated to take it to be true.
This necessity of accepting the thing does not lie in the objeäum itself,
however, but instead in the subject, because the grounds of the opposite
fall short of those that I cognize for the truth of the thing. This subjective
necessity to accept something is quite deceptive and changeable, because
it is not grounded in the objeäum.
The author speaks here also of mathematical certainty of the first and
second degree. The former rests on reason, the latter on experience, and
the two certainties are thus distinguished in the dataL. All mathematical
certainty includes a sufficient ground, a precision, and a certain intuiting1"
of the cognition, the intuitive." Mathematical certainty carries with it a
certain sensibility," for this always occurs only with quantities, but never
with qualities.
In philosophy there are no intuitive cognitions, but only in mathematics,
which has to do with quantities. In mathematical certainty, as in philosophical, there is distinctness and sufficiency[;] precision and evidence
are to be found only and exclusively in the former, however. Historical
certainty cannot possibly ever become apodeictically certain. The grounds
for historical certainty are, however
1. purity of insight
2. correctness of the power of judgment
3. truthfulness, furthermore
4. the inclination toward truth or toward speaking the truth, and finally
5. honesty.
For the last two grounds are the causes of the third ground, namely, of the
truthfulness of him who maintains it. But now from the consequences
nothing can be apodeictically inferred, because there can be far more than
one consequence of one and the same thing. Certain historical cognitions
will have grounds for holding-to-be-true such that they are sufficient for
practical, though not of course for theoretical certainty. Consequently
230 apodeictic certainty is actually distinguished from practical certainty not in
gradup but instead in specie,11 even if some wish to maintain the former.
§ iQO
In this pamgraphus the author calls hypotheses arbitrary truths. An arbitrary proposition makes something be true, only the proposition must not
contradict itself. Such an arbitrary proposition is called a positio. Some-
™ "ein gewisses anschauen."
" "das intuitive."
° "eine gewisse Sinnlichkeit."
f in degree.
* in kind.
182
thing that is objective can never be assumed arbitrarily, but instead only
the subjective is established through the faculty of choice. All arbitrary
propositions concern what one ought to do[,] the practical, and thus they
never teach what the thing is. Apositio occurs only in regard topraxisL, and
thus it is distinguished from hypothesis. Arbitrary positiones, which concern actions, occur notably in mathematics, e.g., with the circle, that one
divides it into 360 degrees, with logarithms, with the relation of arithmetical to geometrical number, proportions, progressions.
The word hypothesis therefore does not mean an arbitrary proposition
at all but rather an opinion based on certain grounds aposteriori, which are
sufficient for these consequences or those.
In the case of positing I do not actually establish anything at all that lies
in the object, but only what I arbitrarily wish and want to have in it.
Mathematical quantity rests on the arbitrary' repetition of unity. What
holds here of a certain kind of triangle, circle, etc., holds at the same time
of all triangles, circles, etc., of this kind. One triangle, circle, quadrilateral, etc., takes the place of all other possible ones. Any triangle at all
contains, e.g., 180 degrees[;] this holds of all other possible triangles. Any
square has four equal sides and four right angles[;] this holds of each and
every possible square, etc. Here the universal is always seen and considered in a particular case, then.
§ J91
Any certain proposition is either unprovably or immediately certain, or it
is mediately or provably certain. That cognition which contains in itself
the ground of truth of another cognition is the ground of proof, and the
connection of the cognitions with their truth is the proof. There are actu- 231
ally three things to be found here, then, namely
1. the ground of proof, or the material
2. the proof, or the consequently or the form
3. and finally the conclusion, which follows from the consequentia!
In every proof, what one investigates is actually not the proposition to
be proved but rather the ratio probandi.' The materia of the proof is the
medius terminus,and its form is the consequentia. Some proofs are empirical,
other proofs are rational. And the latter are either mathematical, and then
they are called demonstrationes,or they axe philosophical, and imperfect
probationer. If convincing proofs lack evidence, the intuitive, or precision, then they are not yet demonstrationes.
Even granting that they are sufficient, rational proofs are still not demon-
' "Willkührlichen undbeliebigen."
1 Reading "der Consequenz" for "dem consequens."
' ground ofproof.
183
strationes, therefore, and still less are empirical proofs demonstrationes.
Empirical proofs can frequently be quite sufficient and evident, but regardless ofthat they are not demonstrationes, for they are not rational. The
word unprovable means here, as we mentioned above, those certain cognitions whose certainty and truth one need not and cannot doubt.
Provable cognition is not clear through itself, but instead is held to be
true only by means of other cognitions[,] as a consequence. Thus if one
holds a provable cognition to be unprovable, one errs in form. The proofs
of God's existence, of his properties, of his effects are not unprovable but
instead provable. With unprovably certain cognitions I postulate," I demand approval, as it were. With provably certain cognitions, however, I
beg and ask, as it were, the approval1' of others. All immediate experiences
are unprovably certain and also cannot be proven. E.g., there is a sun in
the heavens, the barometer has fallen or risen, this is all immediately
certain and thus unprovable.
If, however. I establish universal judgments based on experience, or
propositions of experience, then these are always provable. All rational and
232 unprovable cognitions are axiomata, and they are either synthetic or analytic. In everyjudgment one conceives"" the subject as a mark of a thing, with
which I can otherwise be unacquainted. One knows merely the mark, then;
with this I am acquainted. E.g., the proposition, A body is divisible, is
analytic, for to the subjectto which a body belongs, divisibility also belongs,
and to that to which divisibility belongs, to that subject belongs a body as
well. But a body has an attractive force, this proposition is synthetic, for
separated from all experience, attractive force does not lie in the concept of
a body.
All analytic propositions, where the predicate lies in the notion of the
subject, belong under the law of identity/ Synthetic propositions, however, whose predicate does not lie in the notion of the subject but in a
mark that is distinct from the subject, do not belong under the principium
identitatis and contradictions.y This principium relates only to analytic propositions[.] In the case of synthetic propositions a predicate is added to the
notion of the subject that is not contained in it. And all the propositions
that are thus constituted can be cognized only intuitively, not through
reason. One cannot cognize any coordination at all through reason, for
reason only subordinates. All synthetic propositions are either immediate
propositions of experience or intuitive propositions that are produced
through the understanding and do not lie in the notion of the subject.
Analytic propositions, however, can be drawn out of the concept of the
"postulire."
Reading "Beyfall" for "Begriff."
"concipiret man sich."
Ak, "in der Identitaet"; MS, "der Identitaet."
principle of identity [and] of contradiction.
184
subject per analysin. For they are contained in the notion of the subject and
subordinated to it. Here reason can busy itself and analyze the subordinate concepts and separate them from one another. E.g., gold does not
rust. This is a synthetic proposition, this is illuminatedmerely from immediate experience, and it really cannot be derived from the notion of gold
per analysing] if something is postulated, it must be such that it convinces
everyone absolutely. In a proof, falsehood as to matter is only accidental,
but falsehood according to form is essential. False matter can be corrected, but false form is completely incorrigible^. Furthermore, falsehood
of form is far more extensive and more universal than falsehood of matter.
The proton pseudos,z where someone infers absurdly or also accepts false
propositions, likewise lies in form; for it is peculiar to form that it be 233
subjected not only to many errors but also to uncorrectible ones.
§ 196
To prove something directe means to prove something in connection with
its grounds. That is an ostensive proof; that through which one proves
that that which is the opposite is false is an apagogical proof, then."
To prove something indirecte, on the other hand, is to prove something
in connection with its consequences. This latter, however, can never occur
except negative^ or by denial. We never cognize all the consequences of a
thing, however, but instead we are unacquainted with many of them. Thus
it happens that indirect proof can never become demonstration, but it can
become philosophical probation.
If we want to prove that a cognition is false, this can actually occur.
To have drawn the opposite of such a false cognition already proves the
partial falsehood of the cognitionf;] thus it happens that apagogical inference is so popular, because it is the only one that can give apodeictic
certainty. Since direct inference is not in a position to give anything but
comparative certainty. Apagogical proof, however, is also the one that
comes closest to evidence. Thus it is much easier than direct proof,
too, since it brings the opposite ad absurdum[;] and it is settled that
absurdity always strikes the eye more strongly than any truth whatsoever, just as the cessation of the greatest pleasure is not nearly as sensible to me as the opposed pain, and a pleasure is increased by the pain
that precedes it. Truth, e.g., contains the striking, the frappante, far less
than does the representation of the absurdity of the opposite. The mistake in this proof, however, is that it can prove that the opposite of the
proposition is false, but it cannot prove it by itself. On this point direct
* transliteration of Greek Jigortov tyeuooc;: first, or basic, falsehood.
* Reading "beweis; das, wobey man zeigt, ... ist also" for "beweis, dabey man zeigt,. ..
also."
185
proof, genetic proof, is far better than the former[;] namely, the latter
discovers not only truth but also at the same time its genesisL, its generative source.
However popular it may be, then, one makes use of apagogical
234 proof only ad interim, etc. Proper, true insight is actually attained only
through direct, genetic proof. A cognition is proved direrte when its
truth can be shown from the relation to the grounds. But indirecte, on
the other hand, when its truth flows from the relation to the consequences. Direct proofs are actually genetic and are developed per rationes essendi, non vero cognoscendi.b Indirect proofs, however, are developed per rationes cognoscendi, non essendi.' To infer affirmatively from the
consequences to the grounds is wrong, but instead this must always
happen negativelyf.]
§ J97
If I am to say that something is demonstrated, the proof must be such that
it convinces everyone, that is, the proof must hold not for me alone but
also for others. For demonstration requires evidence, so that the cognition
and the proof of it are such that one cannot possibly postpone his approval. From this it becomes clear, then, that we must use the word
demonstration sparingly. Much can be a philosophical probation but not a
demonstration. Mathematical proofs are of such a kind that they are all
demonstrationes. Thus something cannot be put forward as a demonstration until experience has taught that it is impossible to withhold one's
approval and to oppose it, or until other men agree that it is no longer
possible to doubt the cognition.
In philosophy, then, demonstrationes can only seldom be found. No
aesthetic proof can be a demonstration, then, for an aesthetic probation
arises merely out of the agreement of cognitions with our feeling and our
taste[;] thus it is nothing but persuasion.
I can prove something to someone aesthetically as soon as I am acquainted with his passions and his feeling and am in a position to excite
them. This probation is not universally valid, however, and is therefore
wrongly called a demonstration by our autor.
§ 199
Everyone has an inclination to demonstrate^] evidence pleases everyone[;] what is sad is only that it is so hard and can very seldom be attained.
through grounds of being, not through grounds of true knowledge,
through grounds of knowledge, not of being.
186
§ 200 235
Excessive inclination to demonstrate, says our author, is addiction to
demonstration/ Charlatans do not actually have any addiction to demonstrating themselves, but instead they deceive those who lie sick with the
addiction to demonstrating. The addiction to demonstrating due to pedantry is the true addiction to demonstration, however, and it actually
consists in the fact that one has an inclination either to demonstrate
everything or to accept nothing that is not demonstrated and proven
undoubtedly. Thus pedantry in demonstrating believes trustingly that in
the whole of human cognition one simply cannot make progress without
demonstration. But regardless ofthat, this pedantry can nonetheless quite
often be combined with a sharp critique of cognition. It is really not
ignorance, then, and not error either, but instead one perhaps does not
demonstrate at all, because something cannot be demonstrated, and [one]
prefers not to accept those cognitions that cannot be demonstrated. One
can nourish this addiction to demonstration if one knows how to conceal
the weak side of demonstrations. But one gets rid of it if one knows and
has insight that in many things nothing can be demonstrated at all; and if
one cognizes, then, that much is cognized as a demonstration that is not
proven at all, or is only a probation.
What prevails in our current age is not an addiction to demonstrating but
instead a certain shallowness, a kind of gallantry even in learned cognitions.
But the latter is nonetheless always more bearable than the former. For
shallowness only needs an addition to become thorough[;] hence it is completely capable of improvement. The addiction to demonstrating, on the
other hand, is incorrigibleF[;] with it, one quite often takes false cognitions to
be true and is even proud of this falsehood and not at all desirous of being
taught, and correctly convinced, concerning its opposite.
§ 201
Sensation is the representation of our present condition insofar as it
originates from the presence of a certain object. Sometimes representations arise in us of which we ourselves are the originator, but whose
presence we derive from the existence of a thing. And then it happens that
we often confuse fictions with sensations, and in this way we commit an 236
error. We can often invent something for ourselves, but this is not a
sensation. Thus, e.g., the fear of an impending pain is distinct from the
pain that is present. The fear of pain itself, namely, is a fiction. On the
other hand, the pain itself is a sensation. About sensations one cannot
"die Demonstrations-Sucht."
187
speak or engage in reasoning^ any further, for they are the prindpium
material^ of all our representations.
A representation of sensation^ simply cannot be invented by us but
instead must be given to us by means of the senses. Experience and sensation are distinct as to form and as to degree. As to matter, the two are the
same, but in experience there is a form as well, reason. Experience is
nothing but reflected sensation, or sensation that is expressed through a
judgment.
Experiences, namely, are not mere concepts and representations but
also judgnients[;] e.g., the representations of warmth or of cold are concepts of experience. They are universal characters of things, but we cannot have insight into these merely through the senses, but actually only
through* judgment. Non-rational animals have no experience, then, but
instead only sensations. Anyone who can describe the objects ofhis experience has experience, for description involvesnot merely sensation but also
a judgment.
Mere sensations, without judging about them, cannot be described.
Every experience is actually immediate, and according to our autor mediate experiences are contmdictiones in adjecto.' The judgment that is
made immediately on the occasion of sensations is the judgment of
experience.
§ 203-204
All judgment is either empirical or rational. Some can be empirical as to
matter but rational as to form. But some can be rational both as to matter
and as to form. The form of all our experiences is rational. All experiences
have the form of reason, and without this they will not be experiences.
237 With experiences we must be active through reason[.] With sensations,
however, we are merely passive. The proofs of certain cognitions are
always rational as to form, but as to matter they can arise either from
experience or from reason. A proof without the form of reason is no proof
at all[.] If we want to prove something, we must infer from certain data^,]
granted that the matter arises from the senses, or is a sensation[.] And
hence every proof is rational. Regardless of this, however, it is called
empirical if its matter is a sensation, or if the ground of proof originates
from experience. When one has an empirical proof, the ground of proof is
immediate[;] thus a sensation always originates in accordance with experience from sensation. Immediate sensations cannot be proved.
' "raisoniren d.i.vernünfteln."
f material principle.
1 "Eine Empfindungs-Vorstellung."
* Reading "nur durch" for "durch."
' terms where the adjective contradicts the noun (Ak, "objecto"; MS, "adjecto," KI, box).
188
We must learn to distinguish inferences based on experiences from
judida discursiva about the experiences.
Nothing is more deceptive than for one to infer secretly from certain
examples, but without knowing that one is inferring, and thus for one to
put forward an inference from experience as an immediate experience.
Immediate experience shows us only what is in our senses, without our
thereby inferring anything.
The judgment that expresses appearance is an immediate judgment of
experience. Now if we mix up the judgmentthat expresses the appearance
with those judgments that express the causes of the appearances, then we
confuse thejudidum discursivum with thejudidum intuitivum. Thejudidum
discursivum is thus the one that expresses the cause of the appearances, the
intuitivum the one that expresses the appearance itself.
Care in not mixingupjudida discursiva withjudida intuitiva is of particularly great importance, and it is unavoidablynecessary to exercise it properly so that one does not fall into various errors. All proofs occur from
reason, and the verifying of a cognition from an immediate experience is
not a proof but instead afactum, an inspectio ocularisj as it were.
A proof from reason, however, of which the author speaks in the 2O4th
paragraphus, is a proof which arises from reason in respect of the ground
of proof, or as to matter, as well as* in respect of the formal, and which 238
thus has no need of experience. Proofs from reason have as grounds of
proof such propositions as arise from reason, but in part these propositions arise from experience as to their first origin. A proof from reason is
thus not always a proof of pure reasonf,] without application of experience. A proof through pure reason, however, can only be developed from
such cognitions as simply are not objects of the senses. If cognitions are
even in part objects of the senses, then they have to be derived, as to their'
first prindpia, from experience. Proofs of pure reason find a place therefore only in mathematics and metaphysics. That which can be demonstrated through pure reason not only does not require a proof from experience, but does not even permit one. There have been a few who have
endeavored to invent an experimental geometry, but all their efforts
amounted to nothing but child's play.
Experiences do not permit any universal judgments at all, except of
possibility. Experience simply cannot teach me with apodeictic certainty
that all men must die, e.g., but only that all men who have previously lived
have died. A proof from pure reason proves universal propositions, however, and thus cannot be supported through proofs from experience, for
these do not prove any universal propositions. A demonstration from pure
' inspection byeye.
* Reading "als auch in Absicht" for "oder in Absicht."
' Reading "ihren" for "ihrer," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
189I M M A N U E L KANT
reason is so distinct from a proof from experience that if the two were to
be combined with one another,1" a bastard would necessarily arise from
this. Proofs from pure reason are like a light, while all proofs from experience, on the other hand, disappear, just as the light of the moon is
dispensable and disappears once the sun's rays make the day. That which
can be proved through pure reason attains no new proof through experience, but instead only a mere illustration and elucidation. To have the idea
of a thing is very hard.
One can get much value from a science, indeed, can get solid cognitions from it, yet without having an idea of it. Obviously it happens thus,
e.g., with logic, with jurisprudence.
239 Logic is a science that sets forth the actions that arise according to
form. All conceptus are (i.) empirici, which are concepts arising from
experience^] (2.) intellectuales, from the understanding^] (3.) arbitrarii, from the faculty of choice. There are intuitions in concepts, i.e.,
perceptiones communes[,] universally valid or common representations.
All perceptiones, however, are
1. intuitive"
2. reflexive[,} requiring reflection.
Reflexive perceptiones, however, are again
A. communes
B. singulares.
In logic, however, all perceptiones must be communes. If they are applied
abstractly," then they acquire the name of particular concepts.11 No cognitions can arise through logical abstraction.* Through a conceptus communis
I can consider an object
A. in abstracto or also
B. in concrete.
The word conceptus abstractus is, however, a bad expression. For what
purpose might the art of the human understanding be able to form common concepts?' They serve to indicate the place for each concept, and
they are, as it were, the representatives of a multitude of things[;] hence
they serve particularly for elucidation. The common" concept contains
many [concepts] under itself[;] but these concepts that it contains under
itself contain it in themselvesf;] it is contained in them.
™ "mit einander combiniret und zusammen verbunden."
" "'intuitive anschauend."
" "absonderlich."
p "besonderer Begrife."
* "Absonderung."
' "gemeingültige Begrife conceptus communes."
' Reading "gemeingültige" for "gemeinschaftliche."
190
A wonderful reciprocal relation[.]' E.g., humanity applies to all men,
and in all men lies humanity. The multitude of things, however, that I can
think under the conceptus communis constitute the sphaera conceptus. The
more things a mark belongs to, the greater a concept is in its extension,
i.e., in its capacity," but the less it contains in itself, on the other hand.
The concept of something holds of everything and contains nothing in
itself, and so is it always. But every conceptus communis can be considered
as a conceptus superior[,] a higher concept; nonetheless we name it thus
particularly insofar as it contains other conceptus communes under^' itself. 240
E.g., man contains the male [under itself]. Thus there is a subordination
of our concepts. A conceptus communis is called genus"" in regard to the
concepts that are contained under it, but species^ in regard to the concepts under which1 it is contained. Thus, e.g., man is genus in regard to
males, etc.[;] but in regard to a rational being, man is again species. The
limit of concepts subordinated to one another is the conceptus summus,
i.e., that concept that is a genus but not a species. The conceptus infimus,
on the other hand, will be a species that is-* no longer a genus. A conceptus
singularis has no sphaera, however. The genus summum, then, and the
Individuum, are the two limits of logically subordinated concepts. Every
concept has an extension of those concepts to which it applies, the sphaera
notionis, and the proposition is familiar: quo major est sphaera conceptus, eo
minus in illo est contentum, et vice versa* That conceptus whose sphaera is only
a part of the sphaera of another conceptus is called a conceptus angustior."
A conceptus singularis has no extension at all, and hence no sphaera.
§205
Cognitio a priori is cognition, and probatio a priori is prooff,] from
above. Cognitio aposteriori, however, is cognition, and probatio a posteriori is
proof[,] from below. These expressions are far more suitable than the
expressions of the autor, from afterward and from beforehand[.] Proofs a
posteriori are proofs from experience. On the other hand, proofs apriori
are proofs from reason.
When one proves something from pure reason, no experience occurs. If
one shows something from experience, however, then the proofs from
pure reason are omitted; nonetheless, some proofs can be given partim a
" Gegenverhältniß."
"Capacitaet."
Reading "unter sich" for "in sich."
"das Genus, die Gattung."
Reading "unter denen" for "in denen."
y Reading "ist"for "hat."
The greater the sphere of a concept, the less is contained in it, and vice versa,
narrower concept.
191
priori, partim a posteriori? when experience is the origin of the proofs of
reason. Reason and experience are connected, however, either through
coordination or through subordination. With subordination I posit an
experience as ground and infer from it by means of reason.
241 In the case of coordination, however, I first prove from reason completely alone, and then from experience completely alone, so that the
proof from experience serves the proof from reason as a proof ad.evidentiam.' In this way the connubium rationis et experientiaed is produced.
Experience has no need at all of proof from reason, and on the contrary
proof from reason does not require proof from experience. Neither is
subordinated to the other[;] the two constitute not one proof, but rather
two. For in the proofs there is merely a coordination. But one can be
much deceived in this. If the proof from reason is a demonstration, or a
complete proof, then proof from experience does not serve to strengthen
it at all, but for illustration; and if the proof from experience is a complete
proof then proof from reason does not help it at all either. Proofs from
experience and from reason do not make a coordination, and still less, if
they are already coordinated, a distinctness. Many insufficient proofs
coordinated with one another never yield a demonstration, but instead
they are merely probationes and cannot bring about any apodeictic certainty. Proofs from experience and from reason cannot possibly possess
their evidence, then, unless they are subordinated' to one another. Where
we find very many proofs of a thing we can also conclude that we will
never attain apodeictic certainty; a single proof from sufficient^ grounds is
far better than 1000 insufficient proofs that are subordinated to one
another, because through these one is not in a position to attain complete
certainty. It frequently happens, to be sure, both in mathematics and in
other sciences, that more than one sufficient proof of one and the same
thing is given, but this happens in most cases to show one's art in demonstrating, not because several more proofs for the evidence of the thing are
demanded. But even if several proofs coordinate with one another are put
forth, these do not serve for greater distinctness and certainty; instead, the
thing remains unsettled, as before.
§ 206
One can opine something without believing, namely, if one has more
grounds for the cognition than against it. Here I hold something to be true
242 without its having an influence on our actions. To know something, how-
* in part a priori, in part a posteriori.
' for the sake ofevidence.
' marriage ofreason andexperience.
' "Subordiniret unduntergeordnet."
f Reading "zureichenden," with Ak, although MS has "unzureichenden" (KI, Ixix).
192
ever, is nothing other than to cognize it with certainty. In the case of
believing, on the other hand, there is a great degree of holding-to-betrue, so that one might bet on the fact that something is true.
Beliefis either belief in things or in a person. One can immediatelyhold
a thing to be true merely because one has grounds for the thing, and that
is called believing a thing. On the contrary, however, one can also believe a
thing immediately because a person puts it forward as true, though otherwise, in itself, one would not have held it to be true[;] and then one
believes in a person. But this belief that relates to a certain kind of person
is of two kinds. Sometimes we believe just anyone, be he who he will,
merely because he says something, without attending to his person, or to
his camctere or social position. E.g., when someone says it snowed in his
area, or many ships arrived, then we simply believe this without investigating much; in these cases we do not judge about the credibility of the
witnesses, then. But in certain matters, again, we do not believe just
anyone, but rather we demand a particular credibility of him who puts
something forward as true before we accept such a thing and hold it to be
true. Belief toward a person, however, is either moral or historical. The
former consists in trusting the honesty of the other, although he has not
given any statement or* story. The other consists, however, in the holdingto-be-true of what the other asserts, merely because he has affirmed it.
For historical belief there need not be any particular morality in the other,
but instead we hold something to be true because he relates something
that has happened. Moral belief, however, requires that one have a particular trust toward a person, trust that he is good and honest. If, e.g., in the
absence of his master, a faithful servant faced with impending danger
abandons his own things and saves his master's things, in the hope that he
will reward him well for this service, then this is moral belief. Historical
belief is required only in theology for holding something to be true on
account of an assertion. But anyone at all, even the most wicked, can have
this belief. Without fidelity and belief* no republique, no public affairs,'
would be able to exist, and no pacta would be able to exist either. Fidelity
is always required in regard to him who promises something, so that he 243
keeps to what was promised[;] belief, however, is required in regard to
him to whom something is promised, namely, so that he accepts as true
that the other will keep his promise. The two must be combined with each
other. For if everyone were faithful, but no one believed it, then no
agreements, etc., would be able to occur, just as little as if all people
believed, but no one were faithful. Belief is thus much needed in common
life[;] if no one would give credit, then things would often look really very
Reading "oder" for "der," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
"Treue, und Glaube."
"gemeines Wesen."
193
bad, for one cannot always pay cash immediately. It also indicates a very
bad mode of thought if one never trusts anyone in anything, but instead
one wants to see everything that is promised and pledged to him present
and fulfilled. The Greeks were of this sort[;] they believed no one but
instead wanted to have everything paid at once -in cash. Thus did the
saying arise: Gmecafide mercariJ
Theological belief trusts someone merely based on his assertion and
holds this to be true. With historical belief the object of belief is always
something that has happened, someone else's experience, but not a judgment of reason[;] hence, e.g., if someone were to say to me with confidence, Believe me, there are inhabitants on the moon, I will naturally be
able to answer him, Have you been there? Have you seen them? I cannot
believe what you have produced merely through reason. Hence judgments
where someone else engages in reasoning* are not objects of historical
belief. Theological belief is thus merely historical. Religious belief, however, is not merely historical but moral, since one holds something to be
true on account of a promise, and on account of this undertakes certain
actions in the hope of reaping good consequences sometime in the future.
Through this belief one must hope that there will be a future world and
future rewards and punishments of these actions. In all virtues there is
natural, moral belief, since one believes that good actions will be rewarded
for themselves, in spite of the fact that one did not see any particular
promise for oneself. Such a virtuous person is to be compared with a
creditor^,] he hopes to get a future good,' granted that he does not yet have
a trace of it. Here we are not speaking of this moral belief, however,
regardless of the fact that it is the one most worthy of consideration and
244 most excellent, since one attains credit and trusts not only to the present
but to the future, since one does not will to be paid for everything in this
world but instead to be paid for something in a future life.
Dogmata permit no ground of holding-to-be-true other than either
one's own experience, or that one makes observations of reason, engages
in reasoning, concerning it. The experience of others also occurs here. It
follows, then, that it cannot be cognized through belief either.
The subject, however, who asserts something, and whom I am to believe, must have three attributes above all: ist) capacity to obtain an experience. The subject must therefore have rational reflection. 2nd) It must
have the capacity to preserve faithfully the experience obtained[,] or have
a good memory. 3rd) It must be able to declare"1 the experience obtained,
to expound it, and to acquaint everyone with it. The moral character of
' Totrade with Greek trust [i.e., without credit].
k "vernünftelt."
' Reading "hofet das künftige Gute zu bekommen" for "hofet das künftige Gute."
™ "declariren."
194
the subject, however, is that it also have the mental constitution" to represent faithfully, not otherwise, and to declare the experiences as they were
obtained by him[;] and the pragmatic principle for believing the subject,
finally, is that it have no grounds for expecting advantages if it asserts the
opposite of the experience as it has obtained it.
What can we accept on the basis of belief? We cannot accept dogmatic
cognitions that someone else asserts on the basis of belief," then, but can
only accept experience. We cannot accept universal cognitions of reason
on faith, because with them one can very easily err. Assertions of dogmata
are thus not testimony[;] instead, assertions of empirical cognitions, experiences, are testimony. A witness is thus actually one who asserts an experience. One who asserts universal judgments of reason as true is not a
witness, and the best historical belief is not concerned with dogmata (insofar as they are divine dogmata), but rather only with experiences. But the
conditions under which a subject who has obtained experiences is to be
believed are grounded partly in the subject's own attributes, partly in its
condition. The subject's attributes are partly logical, since it is capable of
having, of obtaining, experiences, of knowing, and of asserting. They are
partly moral, since the subject also has the will to assert the true, or to
declare the experiences as they were. As for credibility in respect of 245
condition, one must also divide the condition into
A. the logical condition and
B. the practical condition[.]
The most honest man can now and then get into situations where his
honesty succumbs. E.g., when he is kept from saying the truth by threats
or promises[;] hence one must pay heed to his condition too.
A large part of our cognitions arises through belief, and without belief
we would have to do without very many historical cognitions. We would
have no greater cognitions than those, at most, of the place where we live
and of the time in which we live.
It is thus a great aid to historical cognitions to adopt the experiences of
others[;] by this means we can experience what happened 1000 years
before us and 1000 miles away from us.
If there were extensive deception of the senses, we would not be able to
trust the experiences that others have obtained[;] if those who obtained
the experiences had such a defective memory, furthermore, that they
could not remember them and their imagination brought forth other
images[;] if, finally, our language had such flaws that we could not express
ourselves and communicate our experiences rightly; then communication
of the experiences of others would be wholly impossible. But even if it is
"die Gemüths-Verfaßung habe, seu ut animum habeat."
"aufglauben."
195
presupposed, as really is true, too, (i.) that we have the capacity to obtain
experiences and (2.) that our memory is also faithful enough to maintain
and to preserve the experiences we have had, without their being destroyed by imagination, (3.) that in our language we are also capable of
making others acquainted with experiences obtained, then for the credibility of these persons or those, who have obtained experiences, it is still
required that they be honorable and have an inclination toward truth. But
this inclination toward truth often arises more from love of honor than
from honorableness. Just because the whole of men's commerdum would
be removed if no one asserted the truth, since then no one would trust
anyone else; because a lie is something harmful, too, and asserting the
truth is the most certain path for avoiding disdain. E.g., geography, phys-
246 ics, history, and other sciences always presuppose the experiences of
others. In common life one must not believe the common man in regard to
such cognitions as do not affect the interest of all men, but are rather
indifferent. For in such cases it is all the same to him whether something
is thus or otherwise, since he does not have insight into the importance of
the cognition. The learned man, however, has far more credibility in this
kind of cognition, for to him even the slightest matters in all cognition will
be important[;] he will also be more inclined, from love of honor, to assert
everything precisely as he has experienced it, since otherwise he would
lose his credit.
As for other things that concern the credibility and honorability of
witnesses who make assertions about experiences they have obtained,
everyone is taken to be honorable and upright until the opposite has been
proved, namely, that he deviates from the truth. According to the wellknown rule of fairness:
quilibet praesumitur bonus,
donee probetur contrariumJ1
To attain proper cognition of the truth, however, it is required in any
case that one also investigate whether someone speaks the truth or lies.
§208
An eyewitness q is one who has obtained experiences himself, or has seen
something, hence is fully convinced of a cognition/
A hearsay witness,* however, is one who has heard, i.e., received from an
eyewitness, or who is a witness to the testimony of the eyewitness. Due to
* Everyone is presumed good until the opposite is proved (reading "praesumitur" for
"prosumitur").
* "Augen Zeuge."
' "Kenntniß."
* "Hören Zeuge."
196
one of the greatest human errors, when they are hearsay witnesses of a
matter, they are inclined to want to be eyewitnesses. They tell a thing with
as much certainty and confidence as if they had seen it themselves, although they have only received it from others. But what kind of distinction
is there between the credibility of eyewitnesses and of hearsay witnesses?
The hearsay witness has, as it were, only half as much credibility as the
eyewitness, for with him I have to investigate first his own credibility, and
then also that of the one who saw the thing.
In a series of witnesses who are subordinated to one another credibility 247
decreases. In a series of witnesses coordinated with one another, however,
the truthfulness and credibility of the testimony always increases. E.g., if
someone describes the history of a learned man or of a king, but his
successor does not hand down the history itself but instead clothes it in his
style, and this happens thus again and again continue», then its credibility
becomes less and less[;] but if, at the same time, many assert one and the
same thing, then its credibility is all the greater, particularly if these are
honor-loving people.
§ 210
A series of witnesses coordinated with one another is called a public
report sive rumor.' A series of assertions subordinated to one another is
called an oral tradition." If, however, in a series of witnesses, coordinated
as well as subordinated, the first originator, i.e., the eyewitness, is unknown, then this is merely a common saying, sive rumor sine capite." And
such an assertion is to be trusted little or not at all[;] little belief is to be
accorded to it. There are certain assertions, however, regarding which one
need not investigate the credibility of the witness at all, but which one
rejects before any investigation.
This seems at first glance to be very obstinate, but it is also certain.
Cognitions that are completely and utterly and obviously false do not need
any investigation at all and in fact deserve complete disdain. Of this sort
are the assertions about the divining rod[;] these deserve no investigation,
one can reject them at once[;] they deserve no refutation, for they are false
in and of themselves.
There are grounds for rejecting testimony, then, that are not historical
or derived from the character of the witness, but rather are rational and lie
in the character of the thing itself. But one has to be very cautious in this
and not just reject a cognition at once, until it is apparent that the thing is
obviously false. Much seems at first glance to be completely false, but on
or general opinion.
"mündliche Ueberlieferung, traditio oralis."
or general opinion without a source.
197I M M A N U E L KANT
closer investigation one finds its opposite. Empirical judgments about the
possibility or impossibility of an eventus still do not justify us in rejecting
248 the cognition at once, without investigating the credibility of the witness.
Someone testifies to something that is quite improbable and contradicts
the ordinary occurrences in nature[;] then he cannot demand that we
ought to believe him at once, merely on his assertion; instead, if he wants
to have this, he must give proof. Thus, e.g., when Pontoppidanss6 writes
that in certain seas there is an extremelylarge fish which looks like a piece
of land and which he calls an octopus,1" then because such an animal has
never been seen, he must prove this. But if someone testifies to something
that quite obviously agrees with experience and reason, then one believes
him without proof. If, however, the credibility of the witness simply cannot
be shaken, but the story or the testimony that he gives contradicts reason
and experience in the highest degree, then the question arises, do we have
to give approval to his assertion in this case and, as it were, deny our
reason, or not?
Answer: The best thing is neither to reject the cognition nor to accept it
as true but instead to postpone one's approval until one has more grounds
for or against it. Now and then there are persons who assert something,
whose credibility one cannot in the least doubt, concerning whom one
also cannot accept that they have the intention' to deceive others, but
whom one still need not trust. The mistake in their assertion, however,
lies in most cases only in the experience that was not obtained, or in a
vitiumy of memory, which does not preserve the experience faithfully
enough. Thus it also happens that people have put forth something very
probable and have maintained that it is true, but when someone asks them
whether they could swear to their assertion they doubt and have to be
quite evasive. Then they commonly say that they could perhaps have
forgotten something since that time. In any case, imagination can also
reproduce for them images other than the experiences which they had.
§ 213
UnbelieP can be taken in the moral sense, when one lacks all trust in the
moral character of a witness. He who has such moral unbelief holds all
249 men to be liars, he trusts no man, he believes no promises, but instead
always doubts the uprightness of other people. Moral unbelief is opposed
to the moral foundation of all human society. Without fidelity and belief,
as indicated above, no state can exist. It is commonly to be found, how-
"Crac."
"den animum, oder Vorsatz."
error.
Reading "Unglaube" for "Glaube."
198
ever, among those who themselves possess a moral depravity, so that one
cannot accord them much belief.
These people pass judgment on other people according to themselves.
Moral belief, on the other hand, trusts everyone, even without any promises. The belief in a future world is of this kind. Incredulity,"however, is
distinct from unbelief.* It consists in the fact that one does not want to
give approval to the logical grounds of testimony. This incredulity can
also be called logical unbelief/ and thus it is quite different from moral
unbelief.
This logical unbelief does not lie in a certain lack of heart, but instead
of cognition, in a certain lack of experience, since one is not acquainted
with someone else's grounds and does not have insight into their importance. It is found principally among those who do not have a proper
familiarity with literature[;] to them, everything seems paradoxical and
ridiculous, although it is true and worthy of belief. One has to be very
cautious about having to do with such people, because one is simply not in
a position to convince them.
§214
Seeing belief is belief that is combined with examination of the witness
and rests on this. Blind belief, however, is belief that accepts testimony
without examination or investigation of its credibility. The former leads to
truth, but the other is the path toward error, thus harmful, but the former
is useful.
§ 215
The unification of all three of these sources of cognition rests on the fact
that they have as a ground not one proof, but rather many. Belief always
requires a connubium" of other sources of cognitions, namely, of reason
and of experience, so that it will be evident and convincing. When a
source of cognition is not able to give a sufficient proof of the truth of a 250
thing, then one has to make use of the remaining fontes cognitionis/ and
from this try to produce greater evidence. If a source of cognition is
sufficient to give a complete proof of a thing, however, then one does not
need the others. If something can be shown completely and evidently
"Ungläubigkeit."
"Unglaube."
Reading "Unglaube" for "Glaube."
"Ein sehender Glaube."
marriage.
sources of cognition.
199
through reason, then one does not need experience in order to make the
proof still more complete. If experience is sufficient to give a complete
proof of a thing, then one need not consult reason.
THE SEVENTH SECTION
Of practical learned cognition
§ 216-248
If a cognition contains in itself moving grounds for actions, then it is
practical. All practical cognition is either cognition of ends or of means[;]
the latter must be distinguished from the former. Practical geometry
teaches no ends, no moving grounds for actions, but only means for
attaining certain ends. It shows the conditions under which an end can be
attained with respect to measurement.
Every doctrine of skill is a practical cognition of means. Every doctrine
of morality is a practical cognition of ends, however, as is also the
doctrine of prudence. Our author speaks in general in this whole section
of cognition, how it relates to free will. In logic, however, the relation of
cognition to will is simply not considered; instead, this belongs to morals. The relation of free will [to cognition] is not an objectum domesticum
of logic. The practical science of skill gives us no moving grounds for
actions. For any science that shows only means and not ends contains no
moving grounds[.] All moving grounds, namely, must be derived from
the end. A cognition is called practical insofar as it is contradistin-
251 guished from theoretical cognition, or from mere contemplation and
speculation. A cognition is practical, however, vel explicite vel implicite.
Explicite, if it shows the rules themselves for actions. Implicite, if it presents the moving grounds or represents truths from which certain practical rules for actions can be derived. E.g., the proposition, Thou shalt not
lie, thou shalt be faithful and honest, is practical explicite. But the proposition, There is a God, consequently one is bound to arrange his actions
in such a way as accords with the holy will of this divine being, is
practical implicite. In metaphysics there are in most cases pure speculationes, not practical but rather theoretical, which have no influence on
the free will, then. Such speculationes are neither harmful nor useful. For
they contain no moving grounds of action. Many of the subtleties and
errors devised by men are nothing other than pure speculations^] hence
we pass over this section, because it is placed here inappropriately and
belongs more to morals than to logic, and no advantage is to be hoped
for from the treatment of it in logic, for this is occupied likewise with
speculative cognitions.
200
THE EIGHTH SECTION
Of learned concepts
§249
Not every representation is a concept. A representation through the senses
is, e.g., a sensation A representation through the understanding is an
appearance. A representation through reason is a concept. The senses sense,
the understanding coordinates, but reason subordinates. Universal representations are concepts, and concepts are universalrepresentations. Sensations, on the other hand, are only singular representations, appearances
likewise, but concepts are universal and arise through reason. As long as I
cannot subordinate a thing to a universal representation I do not yet have
a concept of it. On many points we have learned cognition, but no proper
concept.
§ 250 252
In the case of learned and unlearned concepts there is really no specific
difference to be noted. The distinction between common and learned
concepts is better. A concept is just not a simple representation. The
concept that results from many representations can be very rich, pregnant,
beautiful, and learned, and lively. A concept that possesses much liveliness is an aesthetic concept. An aesthetic concept arises through a multitude and a combination of coordinated representations. A proper concept
of reason arises, however, through a multitude of subordinated representations. The matter of an aesthetic concept consists of its relation to our
taste and feeling; its form, however, consists in a multitude of representations coordinated with one another to produce the proper liveliness. Poets
and orators especially make use of such aesthetic concepts[;] e.g., when
they want to describe summer or spring, they do not show its causes, but
instead they picture only the various changes that take place at these times
of year in the fields, among the animals, in the forests, in the air, in the
country, and in the city. There are many things of which we have sensations, to be sure, but no concepts. We meet with concepts only in certain
cases, where reason subordinates representations to one another.
§254
This division in this §phus is not in any way correct. We do not attain any
representations through abstraction, rather, representations must be given
prior to abstraction, and through it they only become clear. All our cogni-
201
tions are either given, or made and invented. Omnes conceptus sunt vel
dati, vel facti, sive ficti.1
Many cognitions are given to us through experience, and the matter of
all cognitions arises through sensation, through the senses. But often one
fabricates cognitions dirough imagination[;] we form our own world for
ourselves, as it were.
Conceptus dati sunt porro dati a priori through pure reason, vel dati a
posteriori11 through experiences. All conceptus a posteriori dati' are abstracted
ab experiential Others, however, do not arise through experiences but
253 instead are drawn from the laws of pure reason[,] e.g., the concept of the
possible and the impossible. A conceptus abstractus, however, means in
particular a representation that is abstracted from experience, and not a
representation abstracted from reason.
Conceptus dati are thus vel abstracti from experience, vel rationales.11
The concept of every species and genera of things that strikes our
senses is a conceptus abstractus[,] e.g., of horsesf,] sheep, etc.: if I say a
horse, then this is a concept given per experientiam.1 But the universality of
the representations arose through abstraction. The universalityof all concepts through experience arises through abstraction from individual concepts and images[;] the representation itself arises through experience,
however. Here the matter itself lies in experience, but the form of universality lies in abstraction. Through abstraction not the least cognition
arises; rather, universality arises through abstraction. The first origin of
our cognition is thus experience. Concepts of experience are thus ones
that were given through experience and became universalthrough abstraction. Therefore all concepts of experience are abstracted concepts. Pure
concepts of reason, however, are not given through experience by means
of abstraction, but instead through pure reason, and in this way Uiey differ
from concepts of experience. The concept of right and wrong is in this
way a pure concept of reason. These concepts remain constant even
granted that no experience occurs. If die world were ever so godless,
everyone would still have the concept of right and wrong. Concepts of
experience simply do not exist without experience, however. If there were
no horse, then no one would be in a position to fabricate a horse, either.
Fabricated concepts are ones that were made, insofar as they are not
given. These fabricated concepts are called idea prototyp a. Abstracted
concepts, however, are ektypa. The former are original. The latter con-
* All concepts are either given or they are made (or fabricated).
* Concepts that are given, furthermore, are given a priori [through pure reason] or given a
posteriori.
' concepts that are given a posteriori.
' from experience.
* Concepts that are given [are thus] either abstracted [from experience] or are rational
' through experience.
202
cepts are copies, however. He who made the beautiful fables made nothing but prototypa, for such a thing simply does not exist.
The stoical philosopher, on the other hand, is such a prototypon,
aQyimmyv .m All mathematicians' definitions are nothing but ideas prototypas. E.g., the concept of the octagon is not borrowed from experience; 254
instead, the mathematician thinks such a thing through his pure reason.
He represents a figure that has 8 lines and is enclosed by them.
Every inventor must fabricate," and all inventions are fabrications, although not all fabrications are inventions. Fabrication produces archetypes^] abstraction produces imitations through arbitrary combination or
through arbitrary separation.
By leaving out and by adding in one makes fiäiones. All fabrication,
furthermore, is arbitrary or non-arbitrary." Fabrication that is non-arbitrary
is a chimera.
Hypochondriacs are very much subject to non-arbitrary fabrication.
This is now properly the place to speak of arbitrary fabrications, which are
combined with consciousness and the will to have it. If man can subject
everything to choice, then he is the most perfect of all beings, and hence
arbitrary fabrication will often be very useful to him, too.
All concepts that do not arise through attention, through the senses,
which also are not given but instead are arbitrarily fabricated, are pure
concepts of reason. Of this kind are the concepts of the necessary and the
contingent, of causes and effects. Concepts that arise through the senses,
however, and are abstracted from experiences, are concepts of experience.
§255
We must principally endeavor to distinguish concepts of experience from
concepts of reason. What does not strike the senses has nothing to do with
experience. From the mixing of concepts of experience and of reason
arises the vitiutn subreptionis,p which is spoken of in metaphysics. Right
and wrong are not concepts of experience but of pure concepts of reason,
but they would be concepts of experience if the wrong were what is not
customary, what men do not do.
But this is never so. Much is right, which no one does, and wrong,
which everyone does. In the case of the concept of cause and effect, many
commit the vitium subrepttonis, in that they want to derive it from experience, although it is a pure concept of reason. Concepts of experience all 255
relate to space and time. Concepts of reason, however, are the foundation
of cause and effect. We have no experience of possibility and impossibility,
" archetype.
"dichten, und fingiren."
"Unwillkührlich."
p
error of subreption.
203
but only of actuality. We also have experiences only of affirmative, but not
of negative representations[;] what* cannot be, cannot become sensation.
E.g., when we have read a book, we cannot experience immediately that
this or that passage is not contained in it, but instead we must find this out
by inferences.
§25?
Here we really have nothing to observe[;] metaphysics, namely, speaks of
it more extensively. The only question still remaining for us is: how, out of
many experiences, does one make concepts? This is not as easy as it
perhaps seems at first glance. One can have obtained many experiences,
yet not have abstracted from them any concepts of experience.
To obtain concepts of experience involvesinstruction. Anyone who has
good organa sensoria can experience, but to abstract from individual experiences universal concepts of experience, under which the experientiae
singulae may be subordinated, requires a skill in seeing what is common to
many experiences.
§259
One cannot make any money by stealing it from someone, and in the same
way one cannot make any concepts by abstraction. Through abstraction
our representations are only made universal, as already indicated above. If
we have no representations of things, then no abstraction will be able to
make concepts for us. In logical abstraction we compare many concepts
with one another, we see what these contain in common, or wherein they
agree, and dirough diis our representations become concepts.
If many concepts have a mark in common, then this mark is contained
in them. The things are contained under the concept that is abstracted
from them. This concept is a common ground for cognition. It is contained in all things, and all things from which it is abstracted are under it.
256 A concept can be abstracted from experience and also from the laws of
pure reason. The latter are not abstracted from things but instead are
called rational.
By abstracted concepts we always understand concepts of experience,
however.
§ 260
First we wish to speak of fabricated concepts. Every concept that is not
given through experience, i.e., the sensation of things, nor through rea-
* Reading "was" for "das."
204
son, is a fabricated concept. This concept, however, is either made so that
in respect of matter an experience does provide its ground after all, or so
that the matter is not taken from experience at all, but instead both the
matter and the form as well are fabricated. But the latter is impossible. All
fabrication arises, however, by means of arbitrary combination or by
means of separation. By means of combination, when I join together what
is never combined in experience or unified with one another. Through
separation, however, when I separate from a thing what in experience is
never separated from it. With fabricated concepts, arbitrary combination
and arbitrary separation are in most cases combined. The novelist claims
for his hero all the praiseworthy attributes he still lacks, in order to
present a really perfect person, and if he only observes a few flaws in him,
then he abstracts from them at once, he abstracts all of them from the
hero[;] or if this is often difficult, or simply will not work, then he at least
strives to make the hero praiseworthy even in his misdeeds, and thus to be
able so to paint his failings, or to give them such an appearance, that they
lose the ugliness that is peculiar to them and that strikes the eye, or that
they even seem to be so many virtues.
The Arcadian shepherds' life, which was so famous among the ancients
and was so much painted by the poets of the time, is of this kind[;] it is one
of the most pleasant representations that one can ever have or can represent. Everything beautiful, gracious, and exciting is thought in it[;] the
greatest abundance in everything that can stimulate is combined with it[;]
on the other hand, all adversities, displeasures, all lack, which after all has
often and commonly occurred and does occur in the shepherds' life, is 257
abstracted and removed, so that by this means a fully perfect ideal of bliss
can be sketched out.
All conceptus are either
A. conceptus singulares or
B. conceptus communes.
In the former I think only one thing, but through the latter I go further,
namely, I think that which is common to many things.
Thus the former concepts consider something individual. Thus, e.g.,
Rome, Bucephalus, etc. This is a conceptus singularis. The latter, on the
other hand, are concerned with a complexus of many individual things,
thus, e.g., a city, a 4-footed animal, etc. A man, that is a conceptus
communis. The representations of immediate experience are all conceptus
singulares, for they represent individual things. Mediate concepts of experience, however, which are abstracted from many experiences, are conceptus
communes; so, too, are all our concepts of reason. The concept of God, to
be sure, only belongs to one being, to which alone it is to be ascribed, but
without settling whether only one God is possible or more, one can make
out several concepts of God. But afterwards a proof must be added that
205
the concept of God is a conceptus singularis. Every conceptus communis
contains under itself all concepts to which it is common. E.g., the concept
of mortality contains under itself all men and animals, because it is common to them. But such a conceptus communis is contained in all the things
that it contains under itself. The conceptus communis is the ground of
cognition, or the mark of all those things that are under it/ But it is also at
the same time a partial concept of those things that it contains under itself.
For it is abstracted from those things that are contained under it.
Marks are always coordinated with a thing and as parts constitute
together the whole concept of a thing[;] but die diing is subordinated to
the marks that are given of it and is contained in them. The sphaera
notioniss means actually the multitude of things that are comprehended
under a concept as a nota communis.' Through a nota communis I can think
many things, dien. The sphaera conceptus communis" can be large, however,
258 or can be small: the very same concept under which many things are
comprehended is contained in the things tiiat are under it.
The larger the sphaera that a conceptus communis has, and the more it
contains under itself, the less is contained in it. A concept that contains
much under itself arises through the fact that what is common to many
things is abstracted. It is thus a mark of a mark; thus it has much under
itself, to be sure, but little in itself. For a mark of a mark contains still
much less than the first mark, of which it is a mark. If I think something of
many things, dien that which I think of these many things is very little. But
the less a concept contains under itself, the more it contains in itself, and
an individual concept contains die most in itself, for here I cognize only
one object, to be sure, but very much concerning it. The more I think in
my concept, the less I think dirough the concept. A conceptus communis
arises only dirough die fact that what is common to many objects is
considered. That which varies in diem is left aside, however, and not
considered. This conceptus contains litde in itself, to be sure, but it is a
concept of a large sphaera[.] E.g. The concept of body has a large sphaera
but contains litde in itself. A concept can never come to be of a larger
extension, so that it contains more under itself, except by containing less
in itself. This consideration teaches us in particular to evaluate the worth
of our cognition. Through reason we cognize notiiing but notae communes,
hence litde of many things[;] much is contained under, but litde in, cognitions of reason. By means of experience we cognize few objects, but very
much concerning them. Concepts of experience have" minores sphaerae[,\"
Reading "ihm" for "ihnen."
sphere of a notion,
common mark,
sphere of a common concept.
Reading "haben" for "sind."
smaller spheres.
206
but they contain much in themselves. A mark of a mark always has a larger
sphaera than a closer mark, or always contains under itself more than does a
nota proprior." The nota of a thing in general is the nota remotissimay of a
thing. Later comes the nota remotior, remota,z and only then come the closer
marks. The nota remotissima contains the most under itself, however. If
several concepts stand in such a relation that one is contained under the
other, then the one that contains the other under itself is a conceptus superior,"
and the concept that is contained under the other is called the conceptus
inferior.11 One and the same concept can, however, according to various
relations, be now a conceptus superior, now a conceptus inferior, accordingly,
namely, as it contains other concepts under itself or stands under another. 259
E.g., I say men. Then I compare man with non-rational animals and say
animals[;} then the concept of man contains very much under itself. E.g.,
white men, Negroes, and various nations[,] etc., and in this respect it is thus
a conceptus superior. But it is a conceptus inferior insofar as it is contained
under the concept animal. The conceptus nullo inferior' is, however, the
conceptus summus.d This includes the concept of a thing, or of a possible
thing. This conceptus summus is superior^ not merely relative^ but absolute^.
The conceptus infimus,' however, is that which is inferior^ not just relative^ but
instead absolute^. Conceptus singulares are infimi. Conceptus universales, however, are summi, and between these conceptus infimi and summi there is a
longa series of conceptus inferiores and superiores.
§261
Every mark is a ground of cognition of things[;] through reason we cognize
all things only by means of marks. The further a concept is removed from
the immediate mark of a thing, the higher it is and the more it contains
under itself. The very same conceptus communis, in respect of the conceptus
communes that it contains under itself, is called, relatively, a genusL[;] but in
respect of the conceptus communes under which it is contained it is called,
relatively, a species^. E.g., learned^persons are a genus in respect of the particular kinds of learned persons, philosophers, doctors, etc., jurists. They
are a species in respect of the concept of a man in general, however. Aconceptus communis is called species^ because it (i.) is contained under another
* a mark that is closer, more specific.
y
most remote mark.
" a mark that is more remote, [and one that is] remote.
" higher concept.
* lower concept.
' concept thatislower than none.
d highest concept.
' lowestconcept.
/ Reading"gelahrte" for"ungelährte."
207
communis superior conceptus, but also (2.) because it is itself a conceptus communis. For a conceptus singularis, even if it is immediately subordinated to
another conceptus communis, is not a speciesL. E.g., if, under the learned, I
think of Herr von Wolff, this is no longer a species^, but instead an Individuum. Every species^ is infima insofar as under it are contained no conceptus
communes, but merely singulares. Species infima est, quae tantum individua sub
se continet.1 Otherwise one can always think a species^ in turn as a genusL,nnd
subordinate other concepts to it. E.g., a philosopher is a species of learned
260 man. But this becomes agenusL if I think under it in particular the Wolffians,
the Crusians, etc. Allgenera^ that are contained under higher generaL are, in
respect of these generaL, species^, to be regarded as species^. The genus
summum, however, is what can no longer be a species^. The species infima,
however, can no longer be ngenus^. In the second case it is subordinated to
another, but in the first case others are subordinated to it.* Just for this
reason the very same concept can, in different respects, be genusL as well as
species^. The subordination of concepts, however, can occur both logice and
realiter. Logical subordination consists in the fact that I take that which is
common to many concepts and thereby form for myself a universal concept,
under which I can subordinate the individual representations. In this wayI
make for myself various generaL and I subordinate the species^ and individua
to them. Real subordination, however, consists in the fact that I actually
combine concepts with one another, so that not only is one contained under
the other, but instead they also cohere' as causes and effects.
Now we come to the sphaera notionum.' The more abstracted a concept
is, the larger is its sphaera. The larger the sphaera notionisk is, the more the
things of which I can judge, but the less I can cognize.' The senses
cognize much with respect to a few things, but reason cognizes little in
many things. Reason and experience must thus be united as much as
possible, in order to be able to replace what is lacking in the one ground of
cognition through the other ground of cognition.
§262
The concept that contains another under itself is a conceptus latior,mbut the
concept that is contained under another is a conceptus angustior." Thus the
8 A species is lowest which contains only individuals under itself.
* Reading "im zweiten Fall.... im ersteren Fall" for "im ersteren Fall.... im zweiten
Fall."
' "cohaeriren."
' sphere ofnotions.
* sphere of a notion.
' Reading "desto weniger" for "von desto weniger Dingen."
™ broader concept.
" narrowerconcept.
208
concept of man is a conceptus latior in respect to the learned. But the
concept of the jurist, etc., philosophers, [is] a conceptus angustior in regard
to the concept of the learned [man]. The first concept is thus the one that
contains under itself only a single tiling, and through which I can cognize
only a single thing.
The conceptus latissimus," however, is the one through which I can
cognize the most things, or to which the most things are subordinated,
and are contained under it.
A convertible concept'' is one that contains just as much under and in 261
itself as another concept[,] which can thus suitably be exchanged with it,
and of which one can take the place of the other completely.A universal or
common* concept is one under which many are contained. Every conceptus
communis is thus at the same time a conceptus universalis in respect of those
concepts that are contained under it.
A concept can be contained under another concept only in part. Quare
conceptus inferior semper est particularis, ratione conceptus superioris, quare
conceptus superior vero semper est universalis, ratione conceptus inferioris[.}'
Abstract cognition, namely, is the most universal cognition in respect of
the concepts that are contained under it, that is, [it is] the cognition which
contains conceptus summi under itself and descends to all conceptus inferiores
that are contained under it. Metaphysics is the science that contains under
itself such conceptus summi[\] hence it cognizes the most universal character of things.
§263
We can properly pass over this paragraphus, for here the talk is not of
inferences, but instead only of learned concepts. The place to speak of it
will be in the doctrine of inferences, quare hoc non tractare volumus anticipando.1
§ 264
Here the author speaks of the value of abstract cognition. This is very
great, but it is not very necessary to bring this up and to go through it,
because the largest part of all our cognitions rests on this.
broadest concept.
p "Wechsel-Begrif."
* "gemeinschaftlicher."
Hence the lower concept is always particular in relation to the higher concept, and the
higher concept is always universalin relation to the lower concept.
Hence we do not want to treat it here by way ofanticipation.
209
§266
The author now speaks of concepts through arbitrary combination. All
conceptus ficti, however, are made velper combinationem, vel per separationem
arbitrariam.' It is to be noted in general, however, that in all our fabricated
concepts only the form is and will be fabricated.
The matter will never be able to be fabricated[;] he who has no sight
262 cannot fabricate any color, he who has no hearing cannot fabricate any
sound. But all form is fabricated in accordance with the relation of space
and of time and in accordance with the universal nature of our reason. All
concepts are either empirical or transcendental concepts of reason. The
latter concepts include the representations of the possible and the impossible, of the necessary and the accidentalf;] these latter do not spring in any
way from experience and are not abstracted from it, but instead they are
produced through pure reason. Concepts are thus either given or made.
They are given either through experience or through pure reason. They
are made if they are not given either through experience or through pure
reason. These concepts that are made, however, are always fabricatedonly
as to form. Through abstraction I think of a part of the concept, but by
means of separation I negate something from my concept. Abstraction,"
separation^' are thus distinct from one another. Through separation only
fabricated concepts arise, but never through abstraction, kfiaio sepamndo
facta" involves a removal* of what otherwise is usually combined with a
concept. We fabricate much separandoy[;] all novels arise by means of this
kind of fiction. Also, we must fabricate the idea of God in just this way, in
that one separates from it all imperfection and thus attains the concept of
the highest being. Through combination, however, we fabricate something when we put much together that in experience is never connected.
In this way, as already indicated above, novels arise. The stoic wise man
arises by means of this fiction[;] one gives to him more power than is
proper to man. Fabrications are either fictiones aestheticae or heuristicae.
The former contribute to pleasure, the latter to fabricating.
Mathematics and physics have many fiäiones heuristicae^} hypotheses
are of this kind[;] fictiones occur either as to quality or as to quantity,
furthermore. Fictiones aestheticae as to quality are the best[;] those according to quantity are not the best, however. For these do not require great
art, except merely in description, in order to acquire a lively concept
thereby. If only I have an object, then I can soon attribute to it a colossal
' either through arbitrary combination or through arbitraryseparation.
" "Absonderung, Abstraction."
° "Trennung, Separation."
* fiction made by separating.
* "eine remotion."
' byseparating.
210
magnitude, which can cause wonder, of course, but no excitement. But
there are also nonarbitrary fabrications, or nonarbitrary fabricated con- 263
cepts of reason. E.g., of spirits. These concepts did not arise and were not
given by means of experience, nor by means of reason. One comes to
these nonarbitrary concepts by means of an unnoticed fabrication, and by
means of secret inferences of which one often is not aware.
§268
The distinctness of a concept is a property of a logical perfection. The act
of making distinct2 occurs through analysis. But if I make a concept
distinct which, e.g., contains many marks, then I will have to try to avoid
tautology among these marksf;] thus will I promote precision of marks.
I.e., I will restrict the quantity of marks, without however being detrimental to quality. The totality of the distinct representation of a thing is also
sought, and often I need this totality very much. In all distinctness of
concepts I can be satisfied with partial distinctness," but if my marks are
sufficient for the whole concept of the thing, then I have a totality. But if
precision is also sought, then I have a complete, precise concept of a
thing, and that is a definition. Definition, and the action of our soul
therein, can be perfectly compared with the reduction of fractions ad
minimos terminos in arithmetic, e.g., Va 3/6 V3 V$ = V,2.37 And this is also the
purpose of defining. We want to have (i.) a distinct[,] (2.) a complete[,] and
then (3.) a precise concept of a thing. In order to find out whether a
definition is correct, then, we always ask (i.) whether the definition offered, as a proposition, is true[;] and thus we can use many definitiones as
true propositions, in which many otherwise imperceptible marks occur.
False definitiones can sometimes even serve as true propositions, indeed,
one can often do without the complete definition due to the usefulness of
such a true proposition. Granted that it does not fulfill what it promised, it
can nonetheless be useful[;] it can be of use, although it does not achieve
its intention.
(2.) Let one ask whether the definition, as a concept, is distinct, whether I
can cognize it clearly. For any distinctness, however, it is required that a
mark be a clear ground of cognition of the thing. All tautology in definitions is thus a lack of distinctness, and such a definition is not only not a 264
definition, but is also not a distinct concept. All empty propositions are
tautological. E.g., the soul in an animal is a dominant monad[;] this proposition is not empty, but in it a comparative^ obscurum is explained per aeque
obscurum.b But here the uselessness of this proposition can still be removed. With a tautology, however, this does not hold.
* "DieDeutlichmachung."
' "mit derPartialitaet."
* a comparativelyobscure thing [is explained] by an equally obscure thing.
211
(3.) Let one ask whether the definition, as a distinct concept, is exhaustive, i.e., distinct. Nam definire est fines conceptus alicuius ponere.c I.e., the
definition is a determination of everything that just belongs to the thing.
(4.) The question arises whether this distinct and exhaustive concept is also
precise/ namely, [so] that the marks of the definition do not flow from one
another, and are not subordinate to one other, but instead are coordinate
with one another. The marks must stand with one another as compartes in a
whole, but not next to one another as terms of a series. If everything without
which a concept can nonetheless remain distinct and complete were omitted, then such a concept is called conceptus rent adaequans.' The
completudo, then, and the precision of a concept together constitute its
adequation. An adaequatum, then, allows no comparativum. Wolff says: A
concept is adequate when the marks of a concept, and again the marks of
the marks, are distinct. Definitio autem adaequat conceptum/
This includes precision[;] the latter consists in the fact, namely, that not
even one mark in the definition is already contained in the other, or what
is the same thing, that no repetition should occur therein. E.g., if I were to
say, A body is extended, divisible matter, this would be to act contrary to
precision, for the mark of divisibility already lies within the mark of
matter, and consequently the mark of divisibility is merely repeated; for it
lies already in the one mark of body, namely, in the concept of matter. In
short, the most correct and the best definition of precision is this:
Praecisioisa. reductio of a definition ad minimos terminos.1Justus
in arithmetica, e.g., one usually brings fractions ad minimos terminos. Definition, accordingly, is nothing but the relation of equality of two concepts,
namely, so that one can always be substituted for the other.
265 Now let us ask, however, if the concept in the definition is completely
equal to the concept of the definitum. And here we must note: materialiter id est quoad objectum[;]h if these concepts are in fact always
equal, simply so far as their form is concerned, then they are not and must
not be completely equal to one another. So far as the matter is concerned,
I always think the same object, not always in the same way, however, but
instead in a different way[;] namely, I represent distinctly in the definition
what I previously represented confuseL in the definitum[\] and every definition must accordingly be distinct. For distinctness in general, however,
and hence also in the case of the distinctness of definitions, marks are
requiredf;] but in the first place, these marks have to be clear concepts[;]
they also have to be clearer than the concept of the definitum, and from
' Forto define is to posit the limits ofa certain concept.
1 "abgemeßen, dasist Praecis."
' aconcept adequate tothething.
! Adefinition, moreover, isadequate totheconcept.
g to minimal terms.
* materially, that is, as to the object.
212
this flows the canon: ne definiatur obscurum per aeque' obscurum.i E.g., if, to
someone who does not know what a monask is, I wished to say that the soul
is a thinking monad in the body, this would be offending against this rule.
Secondly, these marks must also be clear grounds of cognition. For as a
ground of cognition it is supposed to be distinct from the consequence[;]
consequently it must be thought differently, and far more clearly, than in
the definitum[;] for what merely says the same thing names no ground for
me. And from this flows then this rule: ne notae in definitione sint
tautologicae.1 This is otherwise called defining per circulum. The circulus
vitiosus in definiendo"1 is either implicitus (hidden) or explicitus, namely,
when the marks are one and the same even in their expression. An example of the first is, e.g., the definition, A ground is that by reason of which
something is cognized[;]" here the by reason of which0 means just the same
as qua rationed and consequently a tautologia is hidden* herein[;] and
therefore the form in the definition must always be different from the
form of the definitum. This was the first requisitum of a good definition,
then, namely, that it be distinct.
The 2nd requisitum of a proper definition is now this, that it be adequate, or that it take in neither more nor less than is contained in the
definitum. One can also properly call it completudo or exhaustiveness and
sufficiency. Now the completudo of a definition includes that (i.) the marks
are sufficient for distinction of the definitum' from all other things. (2.)
[that they are] also sufficient for cognition of its identity with other
things[;] or in short, that the definition be neither latior1 nor angustior[.]'
But what does that mean? In the comparison of the thing with others, 266
every ground of cognition is to be used in two ways.
ist thereby to distinguish its identity or
2nd its diversity from all others.
Thus definition is complete if the marks are sufficient to cognize thereby
1. the difference of the concept from all others that do not stand under the
universal concept of it, and
2. the sameness of it with other concepts that stand together under a universal
Ak, "aequum"; MS, "aeque" (KI, Ixix).
' The obscure is not to be defined bythe equally obscure.
monad, or unity.
Marks in a definition should not be tautological.
vicious circle in denning.
"'warum etwas erkannt wird."
"das Warum?
" as ground.
* "implicita verstecket."
Reading "zur Unterscheidung des Definiti" for "des Definiti."
broader.
213
concept[;] the former is sufficiency for distinction, but the latter sufficiency for
cognition."
Now we can note that the more marks a concept contains, the less is it
the same as othersf;] hence if there are too many marks in the definition,
then this can very well contribute to distinction, but not at all to cognition1
of the conceptf.] Hence we can also say: the definitium is angustior if it
does not suffice for the cognition of identity, and latior if it does not
suffice for the cognition of diversity. Or if there are too few marks, then
the definition is latior, but if there are too many marks, then the definition is angustior. It is certainly curious that the means for cognizing
identity are exactly opposed to those I make use of in order to have insight
into its diversity from others. For the more I wish to cognize difference,
the more must I heap up marks, but the more I wish to have insight into
identity, the more I must reduce the number of marks. Now we can
observe this, too: quo maior conceptus deteminatus est, eo angustior est quoque
definition In addition, concerning persons too we can then say: People
who have much wit commonly make definitiones latiores. E.g., they will
quickly say: living beings are those that grow and beget. But one experience, e.g., begets another, yet it does not for this reason beget a living
being. This definition is thus latior. It does not serve for the investigation
of all things and for the distinction of the thing from others, but instead
for cognition of the sameness of the thing with others[;] and from this we
also see, then, that the latitudo of a definition belongs to the cognition of
identity. But as far as the caviller is concerned, he often makes definitiones
angustiores. He seeks to find distinctions where none are to be met with,
and that is the so-called argutatio inanis*
267 From all that is said follows the logical rule, and the 3rd canon: Ne
definitio nee latior nee angustior suoy definito sit,z or with one expresssion: definitio et definitum sint conceptus reciproci."
That is the 3rd requisitum of a good definition, and it appears as if with
this demand on definition all remaining provisions are at an end. But
because in various expressions a mark that has already appeared in the
definition can occur in it once again, a certain precision is nonetheless
necessary in the definition in order to guard against this[;] and accordingly, it is required that one concept or one mark must not already be
present in the other.
As far as tautology is concerned, we already understood it above as a
" "Agnition."
° "Agnition."
* The more broadly a concept is determined, the narrower is its definition.
* inane, empty argument.
' Ak, "sub;" MS,"suo" (KI, Ixix).
z A definition should be neither broader nor narrower than the thing defined.
* The definition and the defined should be convertible concepts.
214
great error, for in tautology the marks adduced are not grounds of cognition, and thus the definition is mixed up with the conceptus definiti.b But as
for this, namely, if the notae in a definition are the same and differ from
one another merely in expression, then this is not such a great mistake,
and distinctness can occur in this case. One errs in this case only in that
one expresses his own thought all too luxuriantly.Now in order to get rid
of this in definition a certain precision is quite necessary. As said, however, this serves more the neatness of the definition than its essence itself,
but still this is always desired in definition. It is just the same here as it is
with clothing[;] it renders me just the same service if it is made large as if
it is made the right size, but for the sake of neatness we reject the former
and choose the other.
Now as for what concerns precision, it is violated, e.g., by the wellknown and customary definition of the circular line. One says, namely, the
circular line is a curved line, whose individual points are equally far removed from the centrum.But the word curved line is completely unnecessary here and lies contained already in the concept of what follows. For
every line whose parts are equally far removed from the centrum must
necessarily be curved. Hence in a definition one must not coordinate that
which is already contained in the same concepts.
Now description is distinguished from definition, for the former is a distinct concept, which, however, is complete merely comparative^. Its exhaustiveness is sufficient merelyfor mypurpose, although this can be completely 268
contrary to the purposes of all others. Description is thus not absolutely
complete, then, like definition, i.e., it does not serve for everypurpose, but
only for my private purpose[;] but it is not on that account to be rejected.
Now we can note: All definitiones are either nominales or reales definitiones. Nominales definitiones are ones that contain everything that is
equal to the whole concept that we make for ourselves of the thing[;]
reales definitiones, however, are ones that contain everything that belongs to the thing in itself.
Or
Those definitiones arenominalwhose marks, taken together, are adequate
to the whole concept that we think with the expression of the definitum.
E.g., if I think and say, Salt is that which is dissolved in water. I do think
that in the concept of salt, to be sure, but that is not all the possible
characteristics of salt itself. Real definitiones, however, are ones whose
marks constitute the whole possible concept" of the thing. Now
1. all definitiones of arbitrary concepts,
2. all definitiones of concepts of reason, and 3.) all definitiones of arbitrary inven-
* concept of the thing defined.
Reading "den ganzen möglichen Begrif" for "denganzen ähnlichen Begrif" (cf. Logik
Philippi, 24:456,1. 21).
215
tions are real definitiones. But why, we ask,are definitiones of arbitrary concepts
always real definitiones? Just because it lies solely with me to make up the
concept and to establish it as it pleases me, and the whole concept has thus no
other reality than merely what my fabrication wants[;] consequently I can
always put all the parts that I name into a thing[,] and these must then
constitute the complete, possible concept of the thing, for the whole thing is
actual only by means of my will.
Secondly, however, the definitiones of such things as are arbitrary inventions are also reales definitiones, consequendy die definitiones of all works of
art, too, for tiiey are always established only through an arbitrary concept.
Now we wish to mention that all mathematical definitiones are definitiones of arbitrary concepts. Mathematicians also have a few given concepts which, however, they cannot define, and die mathematician must
269 not do diis either, for otherwise he philosophizes, and that is then a great
error for a mathematician, into which error Wolffius himself fell. The
madiematician is simply not concerned at all with what others think under
a concept, but instead he says: I wish to name this dius, and so it shall be
called, too. As soon as die mathematician represents the concept in die
definition as given, he philosophizes, and only then can one argue with
him, but not before[;] and dien he infringes against the philosopher, who
can then make a claim against him[;] and it is due to diis ground that a
mathematician cannot define a place, a direction, a straight line, etc., for
diese are all given concepts.
As for what else is relevant to diis, many arbitrary concepts and also
heuristic definitiones are to be met with in philosophy, but they are not
philosophical definitiones.
We can also say, dien: All definitiones of arbitrary concepts are
(i.) real[;] (2.) each of them is free of all error[;] (3.) each of diem is a
complete definition. Arbitrary definitiones simply cannot be false, for since he
says, I will that this shall be called dius, it is called thus, too, and he cannot
commit any error, even if he tries with force to commit it. Only in regard
to precision can he make a mistake here[;] but this is not an error, but
merely a mistake, and from diis we see again what a great advantage a
madiematician has. Namely, all of his concepts are true, and he can make
a mistake only widi respect to precision, diough one can also say that he
has offended against die common use of words. E.g., if he calls the
circumference of a sphere or of a polygon the periphery, although it
should be called the perimeter. Furthermore, the names of tilings that
arise in art are also always true[;] their inventor is always right, for they are
arbitrary concepts. Only when we wish to define others' works of art do we
have to listen to what the others wish to understand thereby. These
definitiones of arbitrary concepts are all synthetic and they arise only per
synthesin, for no concept can arise per analysin, radier, it is only distinctness that can thereby be given to it. Only among arbitrary concepts is the
216
concept supposed to arise, and therefore all arbitrary definitiones are made
only per synthesin. A definition arises per analysin only insofar as when the
definitum is given to us confusedly, and then I can make it distinct per 270
analysin. Per synthesin, however, I make the concept together with its
distinctnessf;] in respect of given concepts we can therefore note that all
given concepts are either given by means of reason or by means of experience. Those given by means of reason are made per analysin, and those
given by means of experience are made realiterper synthesin. Now concepts
of reason can all be defined by means of definitiones reales. For because the
concept is given to me by means of reason, I may think in it only that
which reason shows me in the thing, and in this way I then have a real
definition[;] and therefore we can also say, all metaphysical and moral
definitiones can all be real and occur only per analysin, for the concept is
already given by means of reason, and I am merely supposed to make it
distinct, which happens only per analysin, however. E.g., the concept of
honesty, etc., is constituted thus. But then how is it, 2ndly, with concepts
of experience in respect of their definition? Here we have to note that
definitiones of concepts of experience are never other than nominal per
analysing secondly, concepts of experience are never real except per
synthesin. With an empirical concept I always ask, what is given? And with
it I can then make a definition in two ways, nempe vel definio conceptum
datum. Vel definiendum est definitum ipsum[;]d with all concepts the
former is always a nominal, and the other a real definition. For my concept
contains only what I think in the thing, not, however, what belongs to it by
nature[;] if I want to attain the latter, then I must make a real definition,
and these occur in the case of empirical concepts only per synthesin, as, on
the other side, I cannot get nominal definition in this case except merely
per analysin.
Now we ask: In the case of empirical concepts, is a definition possible?
Oh, no[.] With all empirical concepts there is only a description. At the
most it seems that only nominal definitions would be possible. For to
define realiter is to indicate all the marks which, taken together, constitute
the whole. And a real definition is thus the completudo of the marks that
belong only to the thing itself. But in the case of empirical concepts I do
not define the object but instead only the concept that one thinks in the 271
case of the thing. Marks of experience are thus changeable, and serve only
for nominal definition.
Because the concept is already given by means of experience, then, and
I am to make it distinct, I need only enumerate all the marks that I think in
connection with the expression of the definitum, and thus it seems, in fact,
as if there could still be a nominal definition. But even this is not possible
namely, either / define a given concept. Or the thing to be defined is the defined itself [i.e., the
object].
217
in this case. For even in the naming of empirical concepts we do not all
have the same opinions. For one has a completely different experience of
the thing than the other, and in the case of empirical concepts, therefore,
we can think only of a description, which I can consider merely in relation
to my purpose, but not to all purposes.
What kind of purpose do we have here, then, we ask.
The purpose in this case is not to elicit cognition of the definitum by
means of its analysis, but instead merely to give a meaning to the
definitum. The final end in this case is thus merely an indication of meaning,'' namely, so that this will not be lost from language. For in the Hartz
Mountains, e.g., spruces are called firs and again firs are called spruces. I
define an empirical concept in order to add something to it afterward per
synthesin. But I do not define a concept of experience so that I can become
familiar with the object by means of analysis. I do not define any concept
of experience, e.g., gold, in order to infer something therefrom and to
draw consequences from this definition[,] but instead only in order to
establish the word-meaning of the definitum[.] In this connection we note
this: the definitiones of morals are analytic, and they serve the purpose that
I can draw from this concept all possible consequences. The definitiones of
morals are all real, and therefore I only need to analyze them[;] thus it is
actually curieux that one can infer from the use of definitions to their
particular kind. Empirical definitions are concerned only with the understanding, but not at all with reason (for I have insight into meaning onlyby
means of the understanding)[;] hence they also have no philosophical use
at all. From this it follows, then, that definitiones of empirical concepts are
wholly unnecessary, for even if there could actually be a few, they would
still be merely nominal definitiones. For by means of them I do not say that
taken altogether, this constitutes the complete concept of the thing, but
272 only that this is all that I think in the case of the concept of the thing. All
empirical concepts are capable only of description[;] all arbitrary concepts
are synthetic, and their definition real. Finally, because they are given, all
concepts of reason are analytic, and their definitiones are likewise real.
Now we make these remarks: In the case of all given concepts of reason,
definition is not the first thing, but rather the confused concept of the
definitum is. For in the case of given concepts of reason, I am only supposed to make the confused concept distinct by means of the definition,
and thus the confused concept of the definitum must precede all definition[;] only in the case of arbitrary concepts does the definition always
precede, for this in fact gives the concepts their esse. Now all distinctness
of definitions can be attained only through reason per analysin, and a
concept of reason becomes complete only successive^. Namely, when I
consider one clear mark after another[;] and since every cognition, if it has
"Vorbedeutung."
218
clear marks, is a judgment, all definitiones are at the same time judgments.
Analytical definitions are preceded by many judida elementaria, which
expound the marks that are contained in the concept of the definitum/
Sometimes it is to my purpose to prove something on assumption/ where
only a mark is necessary and the whole definition is often superfluous[.]
E.g., if I say: the soul of man is incorporeal, then I do not need the whole
definition, but instead I take out only the one mark, namely, divisibility,
and say: every body is divisible, but the soul is simple, consequently it
cannot be corporeal.
In philosophy one must never infer the definition too earlyf;] then it
must be the case that I can cognize the whole thing from one mark[;] for
this blocks the path toward cognition of the thing. Before I infer the
definition, I have to analyze the concept for a long time and postpone my
judgment, so that with time I will perhaps attain a still more thorough
cognition of the object.
As for what concerns Wolff's mistake, it consists in the fact that Wolff
wanted to apply the procedure of mathematics in philosophy[;] all concepts in mathesis are arbitrary concepts, and must not be given at all.
§285
The particular is cognized from the universal. In the case of universal
concepts I have
1. to look to the lower concepts, which are contained in the universal, 273
2. but also to the distinction of these lower concepts, and all this happens in
logical division. The synthetic method consists, namely, in the fact that I
compare the sphaera of the concept with all its lower concepts, but in such a
way that I also attend to their proper distinction.
A correct division involves
1. that it is complete. I.e., that the membra dtvidentia (those are just the lower
concepts), taken together,exactly constitute the universal concept.
2. But the membra dividentia must really be opposed to one another, so that I can
say with truth either, or. There must always be an actual distinction, too, e.g.,I
will not divide thus: all men are either virtuous or vicious or philosophers.
This concept lies in man, to be sure, but it is not represented in oppositione.
Division can be codivision as well as subdivision. Subdivision, however, is
where the membrum dividens is again subdivided.*
The rules that the author puts forth herein do not serve any purpose at
all[;] through them I merely learn to express, to represent in abstraäo
' Reading "dieder Begrif desDefiniti in sich enthält" for"die denBegrif desDefinit in
sich enthalten."
* "annehmlich."
Reading "subdividiert" for "subordiniert."
219
everything that I already know, which I already actually employ in concrete
if only I follow my healthy reason.
THE NINTH SECTION
Of learned judgments
§ 292
From the previous section we are already acquainted with judgments,
actually, because we dealt with distinct concepts, which can only arise by
means of a judgment[;] for to cognize distinctly is to cognize everything by
means of a clear mark. But to cognize something by means of a clear mark is
also just to judge. Thus we can also saythat distinct concepts are ones that
are cognized by means of a judgment. Now the 2 concepts diat are
274 compared with one another, and in such a waythat one contains the marks
and the other the clarity, constitute the material of the judgment. That
concept, now, that is to be made distinct through comparison with its
mark, is called the subject. On the other hand, that concept that is added to
the mark as a ground of distinctness is called the predicate.
Comparison is of two sorts, for I can compare two concepts either
through the relation of connection' or through the relation of opposition
between themselves. A judgment, now, in which the predicate is thought
in connection with the subject, is called an affirmative judgment. A judgment, however, where the predicate is thought in opposition to the subjectum is called a negativejudgment. The form of judgment is the relation.
The sign that indicates this relation, or the form, is the copula est,' and
because every relation is either affirmative or negative, the copula is
accompanied with yes (id est,k or merely with est),but if it is negative with
an id est non.1 The negation no, or the non, does not affect the matter at all,
but instead only the form of the judgment[.] It must be posited, then, not
with the subject or with the predicate but instead with the copula, e.g.,
anima non est mortalis,"1 but not anima est non mortalis." For otherwise the
negation of the judgment of reason does not affect the form but instead
the matter of the judgment, and consequently it is then not a negative, but
instead a so-called judicium infinitum.0
"Verknüpfung."
is.
k it is.
' it is not.
the soul is not mortal,
the soul is non-mortal,
infinite judgment.
220
In every judgment there occurs
i. the matter of the judgment, that is, subject and predicate. The matter
of judgment, now, is called die termini of the judgment, and based on
grounds that we will hear later, we call the subject the terminus minor," and
die predicate is called die terminus major11 and is always regarded as a
universal concept, under which the conceptus subject? is contained. All
judgments have die end of distinctness, but in a judgment one represents
die predicate as die ground of the distinctness of the subject. Because die
ground of distinctness is in a mark, now, we see tiiat die subject must
always be contained under the predicate as a mark. The
2nd thing in each judgment is its form. The copula est always expresses
this[.] This copula is posited simpliciter, now, if it indicates die relation of
two concepts in their connection[;] but if it expresses die relation in the 275
opposition of these concepts, then it is accompanied with the word non.
This non expresses the negation of die judgment, now, but N.B.: only
when it affects the form of the judgment, i.e., the copula.
§29?
Where die author says that all true judgments have a ground, die ground
of trutii is the condition of judgments[;] unprovable judgments have no
particular ground of cognition, but instead diey are tiiemselves the
grounds of cognition, and consequendy diey cannot contain any grounds
of trudi[,] as the audior nonetheless says here[.] Such, e.g., is die judgment, Every body is extended, for this judgment cannot be derived from
anything else. But now if the condition of truth is merely added to a
judgment, die judgment is dien determined. Now every judgment is determined, and I simply cannot represent to myself how there can still be
people, among whom our author is included, who say that certain judgments are undetermined [;] one should really say unrestricted, for what is
not determined is also never a judgment.
§301
All judgments are either universal orparticular. It is universal if die nota of
die subject is contained in die sphaera of die predicate either completely
or not at all, and in die first case it is a universal affirmative judgment, but in
the odier case, namely, if die nota of die subject is completely outside die
sphaera of die predicate, it is a universal negative judgment. A particular
judgment, however, is one where the nota of the subject is contained, or
minor term,
major term,
concept of the subject.
221
not contained, only partly under the sphaera of the predicate[;] in the first
case it is a particular affirmative judgment, and in the other a particular
negative one.
Several judgments quoad quantitatem1 do not exist, for as regards singular judgments (judicia singularia), or those where the subject is an
individuum, these are included among universal judgments. But concerning them, one can observe this further: a singular judgment must be either
wholly affirmative or wholly negative. Nothing more occurs in this case, for
276 it is included in the universal judgment, and thus every singular judgment
is universal. Now this was the division of judgments quoad quantitatem,
namely, into universal judgments and particular ones. In regard to quality,
now, all judgments are either affirmative or negative, and in fact either
universal affirmative or universal negative orparticular affirmative orparticular negative. Logicians express the first by A, the second by E, the 3rd by /,
and the 4th by 0. This whole designation is mere pedantry (Barbara[,]
Celarent[, etc.]), and what is more, all of syllogistic is mere pedantry[;]
and I will show hereafter that inferences of reason outside the first figure
are not simple, as is falsely held, but instead are composed of a consequentia immediata' and a ratiodnium." Now although syllogistic is unnecessary, one must still know it.
The following remark is to be noted well: Omnia judicia sunt vel
problematica, vel assertoria? (decisive). Aproblematic judgment is one in
which I only consider the relation of two concepts undetermined, but do not
posit it[;] in this judgment I consider something as given for investigation,
i.e., I establish no relation in the judgment, but instead I only see what
would follow from this were it really so. Regardless of this, they have great
use. For by means of the relation of two such judgments one can nonetheless learn to use a certain caution in judging, and to make our judgments
useful.
§ 305-307
Every relation in judgments is either a relation of connection or a relation
of opposition. That judgment by means of which the relation of connection of two judgments with one another is indicated is called a hypothetical
judgment. That judgment, however, in which the relation of opposition of
two judgments is indicated is called a disjunäive judgment. Those judgments where one thinks the relation of two judgments with one another
are called, in fact, judgments of relation" (relative^;} now these judg-
1
as to quantity.
' immediate inference.
" inference of reason.
" All judgments are either problematic or assertoric.
" "Verhaltniß Urtheile."
222
ments consider the relation of one judgment to the other, either as to
connection, and then they are hypothetical judgments, or as to opposition,
and then they are disjunctive judgments. In the case of the former, one 277
always finds the relation of ground to consequences. Now in conditioned
judgments, that which contains the ground is called antecedent or also
prius. That which contains the consequences, however, is called in these
judgments consequent or posterius. As for what concerns disjunctive
judgments, in them the relation of opposition is again of two kinds[;]
either it is a relation of two, or of more judgments, which contradict one
anotherf;] but we will show that a true disjunctive judgment occurs only
with two and not with several judgments, for a true and pure contradiction
cannot occur except with two concepts that stand exactly in opposition to
each other. Then it is called a bimembris propositio, and since disjunctive
judgments contain the relation of a true contradiction, they can only
include 2 judgments. If we judge merely rationally, then the propositio
disjunctiva must be in the judgment bimembris, but those disjunctive judgments whose propositio disjunctiva is not bimembris have all arisen out of
induction[;] for how else do I know that I have correctly enumerated the
cases except from experience, and thus per inductionem. A disjunctive
judgment, if it is to become certain without induction, must be bimembris.
A disjunctive judgment is nothing more than a representation of a logical
division, or representatio divisionis logicae.
§310
An exponible judgment is one that actually in a hidden way has 2 judgments, not in such a way that it has 2 subjects or predicates, but rather in
such a way that the judgments in it are of two kinds as to quantity, also as to
quality[;] for they are affirmative, but also negative. Now logic has the duty
that it must explicate*exponible judgments. What is meant bythe questions
quae? qualis? quanta? (i.) The question Qualis est proposition aims at
quality, namely, whether the judgment was affirmative or negative. (2.)
Quanta est proposition contains the question, whether itwasa universal
or a particular judgment? (3.) Qjiae est proposition is the question,
whether the judicium is purum or modale. A judgment is called modal,
however, which carries a condition of judgment with the praedicatum[.]
These questions must be answered according to the character of the judgment. Therefore if an empty judgment appeared, people used to say: quaet 278
qualisl quanta? I.e., there is nothing in the judgment.
exprimiren."
Of what sort is the proposition?
Of what quantity is the proposition?
What is the proposition?
223
§312
A judgment is expressed practically if it enunciates a possibly necessary
action. This probably seems to be contradictory, that something is possibly
necessary. But here it is completely correct, for the action is always necessary, to be sure, namely, if I want to bring the thing about[;] but the case is
not necessary, but merely possible. It is very good that one does not posit
the imperativum with this kind, but instead only the inßnitivum, and that
one expresses them with if,etc.
§313
Provably certain means nothing other than a mediately certain judgment.
But a judgment is absolutely improvable, on the other hand, if it is immediately certain. And such judgments must also be found in the human
understanding^] for even though we have ever so many deductions, and
we can cognize these from their grounds as from their marks[,] still we
must finally come to a ground that is not a consequence of another ground
but instead is the very first ground of all of the consequences themselves[;] and this is then immediately certain, or an unprovably certain judgment. But now whether there is just one such absolutely first ground or
many of them, this is treated in metaphysics.
All unprovable judgments, insofar as they are the ground of all judgments, are called principles[,] and they are either theoretical or practical. A
proposition that is unprovable practically is called a postulatum. All these
principia are either material, namely, insofar as they have a medius terminus,
or formal, which have no medius terminus. These latter have no determinate predicate, but instead they are concerned merely with the relation of
predicates to subjects in general. These include the principium contradictionis and the principium identitatis. For these there is, namely, no determinate subject or predicate, or no determinate casef;] instead, it can be
applied to any subject and predicate. Now in our judgments we have two
279 forms, namely, synthetic and analytic form[;] the principium contradictionis,
now, is only analytic.
Here the author gives an instruction for demonstration. We have such a
thing as tautological definitiones, hence also tautological resolutions,namely,
where one answers the very same thing that was asked. And that is what our
author does here. When there is a question, let us attend quite well to
whether the proffered reply and resolution of the question is not merely an
analysis of the question itself. But then through this I have not taught the
other to resolve the question, but instead have only made him familiar, by
224
means of analysis, with what was in it. Thus I have not done anything more
than make him understand better that which he asked me. This is what the
author does many times, too. It is curieux; he merely shows me that I should
do that about which I asked him, and he does not show me how I should do
it. In my recent disputation De mundi sensibilis et intelligibilis forma et
principiis^ I also had to clear up various quaestiones, but I did not merely
analyze the quaestiones, but instead in fact also indicated marks of the thing
that were completely correct and complete. E.g., p. 30, § 25 (vid. Diet.
Metaph.,39 in which this disputation isbound)[.] There/0 namely,this infallible mark of sensibility is put forth: si de conceptu quocunque intellectuali generaliter quicquam praedicatur, quod pertinet ad respectus spatii atque
temporis: objective non est enuntiandum et non denotat nisi conditionem, sine
qua conceptus datus sensitive cognoscibilis non est. * vid. ibid.
§319
Where the author speaks of intuitive judgments/ An intuitive judgment is
actually a singular judgment insofar as it is cognized immediately, but a
judicium discursivum is an inferred judgment/ All immediate judgments, however, are intuitive only because they are cognized immediately,
insofar as their form is sensitive!;]' f°r otherwise, if the form is rational,
then immediate judgments are nonetheless not intuitive judgments!;] it is
only discursive judgments that can be contradistinguished from intuitive
ones, and the ancients called universal judgments discursiva, but the 280
singular ones intuitiva, and that is how we will take it here, too. Now this
was concerning intuitive judgments or judgments of experience. Now it
belongs to metaphysics to investigate whether a judgment is a judgment of
experience or not. Logic does not consider judgments insofar as they are
given[,] as metaphysics does, but instead insofar as it is to compare them.
Logic only shows whether judgments are universal or particular, and thus
it is occupied only with opposition and identity. All propositions are either
theoretical or practical. The former are such as merely show the relation of
concepts to other concepts, but the others indicate the relation of action to
concepts. Both propositions are provable or improvable. Propositions that
are provable theoretically, if they arise by means of a mtiocinium polysyllogisticum, are called theoremata. Everyprovable proposition, however, that is
only monosyllogistic is called a corollarium. A proposition that is provable practically is a problema[,] but a proposition that is unprovable
If anything that pertains to an aspect of space or of time is predicated of any intellectual
concept in general, then it is not to be said objectively, and it denotes only the condition
without which the given concept cannot be cognized sensibly.
"von den Anschauenden Urtheilen."
"ein geschloßen Urtheil."
"Sensitiv."
225
practically is called a postulatum. In the case of all propositions that are
provable theoretically, the proposition itself is the theorema, but the
proof of the proposition the demonstration; the action that is to be done in
this case is called the quaestio[.] The propositions in accordance with
which it is cognized, its resolution. A lemma is a proposition that is in fact
provable, not in this discipline, however, but in another, from which it is
taken. With this one must take great care, so that one does not assume
something and put it forth as something proved in another science, although it is not proved there at all[;] indeed, one often finds in authors
something that they assume at the beginning, which they promise to prove
at the end,but the proof is forgotten. Scholia are propositions that are
added to a system not as essentialia but instead only as accidentalia.
§ 341-346
Every inference in general is a judgment, only with this difference: if the
judgment is mediate, then it is an inference of reason, or a mediate inference.
But if the judgment is immediate, then the inference is only an inference of
the understanding, namely, one is judged from the other absque media
termino\^then the judgment, or also the conclusio, is immediata[.] Or
281 one is inferred from the other per medium terminum,1 and then the
inference is mediate^, or also an inference of reason. We will now consider
only immediate* inferences. As for what concerns their mode of origination, this is fivefold, for they can arise either
1. perjudicia aequipollentla' or
2. perjudicia subaltemata,1 or
3. perjudicia oppositak or
4. per conversionem logicam or
5. per contrapositionem."1
Now" as for what concerns the consequentia per judicia aequipollentia,
because both judgments in it are completely the same as one another, this
is really not a consequentia' at all, and hence the so-called inference per
judicia aequipollentia is not an inference at all.The consequentia perjudicia
subaltemata occurs without any alteration of the positions of the termini,
f without a middle term.
* through a middle term.
* Reading "unmittelbahre" for "mittelbahre."
' through equivalent judgments.
' through subalternate judgments.
* through opposed judgments.
' through logical conversion.
" through contraposition.
" Inserting a paragraph break after "per contrapositionem."
' Reading "Consequenz" for"Consequens."
226
the quality also remains the same, only the quantity is altered therein. In
the consequentia per conversionem logicam the quality must likewise never be
altered but only the quantity. In the conversio logica, however, both the
position of the termini and also the quality must be altered. With the
oppositio judidorumf logicians have hit upon the following division:
1. 2 judgments are set against one another contradictorie when a particular
negative judgment is opposed to a universal affirmative* judgment (or conversely). E.g., all men are mortal, but some are not mortal.
2. judgments are subcontraria when in 2 particular judgments that have the
same subject and predicate one is affirmative and the other negative.
3. there is also a contrarietas judicii[;]r this occurs when in 2 judgments the
one is universal affirmative and the other universal negative, jfudici'a subcontraria contain less than is required, or not enough, for proper opposition[;]
judicia contraria contain more than enough for proper opposition, and judicia
contradictoria exactly enough. And we therefore can say that judicia subcontraria, because they do not contain enough, can (i.) both be true, but they
(2.) cannot both be false.
Secondly, judicia contraria can both be false, for in the two there is too
much, and just in their too much they can also be false. Of 2 pure 282
oppositions the following must constantly be able to hold good: posito uno
tollitur alterum.* Et vice versa[.] In all logical conversion (vid. ant. § 346) of
judgments the judgment that is to be converted is called conversum,
the judgment that is to arise from this conversion the convertens. A conversio in which the quantity' of the judgment is not restricted" is called
simplex, but where it is restricted,v a conversio per accidens. Universal
affirmative judgments may be converted per accidens, but all negative
judgments can be converted simpliciter[;] that is the only rule of logical
conversion. The rule of contraposition is this: only universal affirmative judgments may be contraposed.
THE TENTH SECTION
Of learned inferences of reason
§354
Inferences of reason are judgments that occur mediately by means of a
medius terminus. As previously said, there are also certain judgments and
p opposition of judgments.
Reading "einemallgemein bejahenden" for "einem bejahenden."
contrariety of judgments.
through the positing of one the other is denied.
Reading "Quantitaet" for "Qualitaet."
"gehindert."
"gehindert."
227
consequences, which we have named immediati[\] these were indemonstrable. Unprovable consequences of one judgmentfrom other judgments
we also called, not an inference of reason, but rather an inference of the
understanding. On the other hand, however, there are also certain consequentiae from other mediate judgments, and these are always provable.
There are uncertain illusory inferences,* which are not inferences of
reason but only mere themata to these, and of this sort are the so-called
ratiocinia disjunctiva and hypothetica, or also speciosa. Here we will
not treat these inferences, which are only themata to inferencesof reason,
but instead will treat only inferences of reason themselves.
If two concepts are put together and the one is the mark of the other,
then in these concepts a certain relation is posited. Now this relation can
be represented immediately, and then it is a judicium. But if it occurs per
notam intermedium, then it is a ratiocinium. Or the inference of
283 reason is nothing other than the comparison of a nota remota with the
thing itself by means of a nota intermedia. The mediate relation of a nota
remota with the given concept is always remota in respect of the thing, but
this is also a nota proxima of the nota intermedia, and hence a nota rei
ipsius[;]* this is a judicium medium, or a ratiocinium.
An adequate inference consists in an inference of reason whose rule is
this: nota notae rei est nota rei ipsius[,]y and this is also the basic rule2
of all syllogistic, and at the same time the whole distinction between a
judgment and an inference of reason. A judicium, namely, involves an
immediate clear mark, but a ratiocinium involvesa mediate clear mark.Consequently a ratiocinium is the relation of the nota remota by means of a nota
mediata, vel intermediata" to a certain given concept of a thing. In a ratiocinium, then, these 3 actions occur: ist the nota proxima or intermedia is compared with the nota remota, 2nd the nota proxima is compared with the thing, et 3rd the nota remota is compared with the thing
itself. The nota intermedia is also called the medius terminus. Now
because in every judgment the predicate constitutes the major terminus,we
can say: in every inference of reason there are 3 termini, (i.) the proposition that I am to cognize by means of the nota intermedia, (2.) the nota
remota and (3.) the terminus medius, or the nota intermedia, which contains
the ground of the relation of the thing to the nota remota. And these
constitute the 3 termini, namely, major, minor et conclusio. In every inference of reason (i.) the terminus major is compared with* the terminus
"Scheinschlüße."
mark of the thing itself.
A mark of a mark of a thing is a mark of the thing itself.
"die Grundregel."
a mark that is mediate or intermediate.
Reading "mit" for "in."
228
medius, or the nota proximo, with the nota remota[;] (2.) the terminus
medius with the minor or the subjea[;] and finally (3.) the minorwith the
major or the predicate.
To infer, then, requires only the synthetic mode of reason[;] now this
requires always that one descend from the universal to the particular[;] if
one turns this around, it's contrary to reason and then a leap is made.
And therefore die major propositio, or the predicate of conclusion, must
always come first, or I must first go per notam remotam to the nota
proxima[;] then I have to go again from the nota proxima to the thing, and
finally from die thing to die nota remota. That is die syndiesis of reason, 284
and if one loses sight of this, dien one does not observe die order. In
every inference of reason there are certain termini, then, of which diere
must be no more tiian 3, and in every proper inference of reason diere
are not more than 3 judicia, eidier. The first 2 are called die premises,
while the 3rd judgment is called the conclusion. Now die premises constitute die matter of inferences of reason, but die conclusion die form[;]
and hence the correct form of an inference of reason will rest solely on
the correct consequence of die conclusion. Now in bodi inferences die
medius terminus or the nota intermedia always occurs (but not at all in the
consequens itself). Every inference of reason is nothing but a representation
of a mark by means of a terminus medius. An inference of reason involves
one mark being subordinated to anodier mark of the thing as a notae
nota.' In an inference of reason I dius compare the nota remota with the
nota proxima, dien the thing widi the nota proxima, and finally also the
nota remota with die diing itself. All form of inferences of reason is only
of two kinds, and diere are not more, eidier, for the judgment is eidier
immediate or mediate[.]
The basic rules of all affirmative inferences are these:
1. Nota notae rei est nota rei ipsius[.]
The only basic rule, however,
2. of all negative inferences will thus be:
Repugnans nota notae rei, repugnat rei ipsi[.]d
This is now die basic rule of all inferences of reason.
Logicians have a certain dictum de omni et nullo, which diey take to
be the very first ground of all ratiocinia. But these basic rules that have
been presented precede even this.
Among logicians, the dictum de omni et nullo runs dius: what belongs to a universal concept belongs also to all concepts that are contained
under it.
mark of a mark.
If a mark conflicts with the mark of a thing, it conflicts with the thing itself.
229
§ 392-395
When, in an inference of reason, the relation oftwo judgments (not of two
concepts) is considered, then that is called a ratiocinium extraordinarium^ or when an inference of reason is accepted, where the major
propositio is not a judicium ordinarium but rather a judicium ex-
285 traordinarium, then it is also called a ratiocinium extraordinarium.
All ratiocinia extraordinaria are either hypothetica or disjunctiva.
For in them either the relation of connection or the relation of opposition
is indicated; if it is the first, then it is called a hypothetical inference of
reason, but in the other case a disjunctive one.Now thejudictum hypotheticum consists only of 2 propositions and hence nojudicium hypotheticum can
produce a ratiocinium. In the judicium hypotheticum only the consequentia'
needs to be proved, for in this judgment nothing is enunciated or maintained. But v/iihjudicia categorica not only the consequential\>vA also the
assertion itself must be proved from correct grounds. The conditioned
inference is not an inference of reason but instead only the substratum
for the inference of reason, for it must first be proved per ratiocinium.
Hence it is only the question itself, and the datum^ that is to be proved[;]
hence nothing is actually proved thereby, but instead a ground is merely
stated, of which one affirms at the same time that its consequence is
correct[;] but how it is correct, that I do not see at all by this meansf;] it is,
so to speak, only the ground of proof, not the proof[;]? that is to say, by this
means merely the matter of the proof is given, not the form. This analysis
is certainly not unnecessary, and [is] completely correct. For in the
judicium conditionale no subject is connected with a predicate by means of
a mediate mark, and in such an inference there is simply no major
propositio, and hence they are not ordinary inferences of reason at all, but
instead only substrata for these[;] one does not really infer in accordance
with them, but instead one only says the very thing that one wants to infer.
Every proof concerns either the truth of the antecedens or of the
consequens. Every Syllogismus hypotheticus has 2 modi, namely, a
modus ponens, where an affirmation is inferred in the conclusion, and
the modus tollens where, namely, a denial is inferred. An affirmation is
inferred here according to the rule: atqui verum estprius, ergo quoque
posterius.h The denial, however, is from the falsehood of the consequens to
the falsehood of the antecedens, but not' according to the rule: atqui
' Reading "Consequenz" for "consequens."
^ Reading "Consequenz" for "consequens."
s Reading "der Beweißgrund, nicht der Beweis" for "derBeweißgrund, nicht das Beweißthum."
* but the former is true, hence the latter is too.
' Reading "und zwar nicht nach" for "und zwar nach," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
230
falsum est prius, ergo quoque posterius. Remold antecedente non
tollitur consequent sed sublata consequentia tollitur antecedent*
Here, then, I can never infer a negatione antecedents' to the negatio consequentis,"1 but of course I can infer conversely.
As far as disjunctive inferences are concerned, these are inferences in 286
which the majorpropositio is disjunctive. A disjunctive inference is a logical
divisional in it I represent to myself a divided concept and all the membra
that are equal with the divisum. In it the subject of the major propositio is
the divisum, and the predicate is all the membra dividentia. Consequently
the correctness of a disjunctive inference rests on the correctness of a
logical division[;] all things, that is, must stand in true disjunction and
opposition to each other, and besides they must all be complete.
§397
A dilemma is actually a ratiocinium hypotheticum, whose consequentia is
disjunctive. Let one proceed in this case according to the rules of the hypothetical aswell as those of the disjunctivemode of inference. Atqui falsum
est prius, ergo etiam posterius" One never has a dilemma as a modus
ponens, but alwaysas a modus tollens. By means of a dilemma we do not seek
to prove a proposition properly, but instead only to convince someone of its
falsehood. The dilemma is also called a comutus,0 because by means of it
one refutes another and also at the same time cuts off all paths[;] he may
take whichever he will, still he is caught. And therefore this dilemma is
much used in dialectic[.] On account of this the sceptici like to use it.
§398
Here the author speaks of immediate inferences, but it is not appropriate,
for they are not inferences of reason but rather inferences of the understanding. For they have no medius terminus.
§399
Inferences of reason are either formal or ratiocinia crypticaf Ratiocinia
cryptica are those where I only enunciate 2 judgments, but think the 3rd
1 Reading "posterius. remoto" for "posterius remote," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiv).
But the first is false, therefore the latter is also. When the antecedent is removed the
consequent is not denied, but when the consequent is denied the antecedent is denied.
from the negation of the antecedent.
negation of the consequent.
But the former is false, hence the latter is also.
horned one.
f hidden inferences.
231
while doing so. In such a Syllogismus one alwayssays less than one actually*
thinks, and this is the so-called concealing,' which often is quite healthy
and fair. But pretending5 is when one speaks otherwise than as one thinks.
And is of course to be rejected as unfair.
287 Enthymema[.] This is an inference in which only 2 judgments, a
praemissa and the conclusio are posited. These also include the ratiocinia contracta. These are syllogismi where not 2 propositions but
only one proposition and the medius terminus is present. Also included
here is induction, which is particularly noteworthy. The rule of reason in
the case of apodeictic certainty in inferences always goes from the universal to the particular. There are inferences, nonetheless, where we infer
from the particular to the universal. The former is the ratiocinatio
rigida. But the latter is the ratiocinatio laxa. Now this last includes (i.)
inductio. (2.) analogy. Inductio is the inference where I take to be true, as
if it belonged to all, what belongs to many things under a universal inference and concept. I infer thus: what belongs to as many things as I have
ever cognized must also belong to all things that are of this species and
genus. This kind of inference is completely opposed to logical rule, to be
sure, but we cannot do without it, and along with it most of our cognitions
would have to be abolished at the same time.
2ndly, as for what concerns inference according to an analogy, this is
nothing other than an induction, only an induction in respect of the
predicate. When, namely, 2 things have come together in respect of all
attributes that I have been able to cognize in them, then they will also
come together in the remaining attributes, which I have not cognized in
them, and thus runs the inference in regard to analogy. Analogy and
induction are merely crutches for our understanding. For in universal
propositions of truth we will alwaysbe able to proceed according to logical
strictness, but in the use of our cognition (a posteriori) we often have to
make do with the probable too.
There is a complete induäion, also an incomplete one. Complete, when its
membra are equal to the given concept, or when everything can be derived
from a particular concept.
§ 402-405
Every inference false in form is a paralogismus. But every inference that
is supposed to be a means for producing error in another is called a
sophisma. There are various sophismata, which can be covered by many
288 names, which is not at all necessary, however. In addition there are also
Reading "wirklich" for "willkührlich."
"dissimuliren."
"simuliren."
232
some sophismata that deserve a place in logica, for some of them can be
truer than the others. In addition the author is thinking here of the
sophisma ignorationis elenchi. For us, however, only this needs to be
noted: He who, in a dispute, forgets the disputed question, commits a
sophisma ignorationis elenchi.
§ 406-407
If inferences of reason are coordinated with one another, there arises from
this a ratiocinium compositum, also polysyllogisticum. A ratiocinium
is called polysyllogisticum' when the condusio of one inference of reason is
the praemissa of the other. That Syllogismus, now, whose condusio is the
premise of the other is called a prosyllogismus. But that Syllogismus
whose praemissa is a conclusion of the former is called episyllogismus.
Or more briefly: the prosyllogismus contains the ground, but the
Episyllogismus the consequence of an inference of reason. Vid. auct:"
§406-408: There is a sorites per syllogismos hypoth.: and then it is called
sorites hypotheticus[;\ or the sorites can arise per syllogismos categoricos,
and then it is also called categoricus.
Theformalia ratiocinia are used only in disputation but not in books and
the like, for otherwise this would become too troublesome. And as for
what otherwise concerns the many inferences of reason, these make
things more indistinct than distinct. They are only expressed because
reason actually thinks them."
§410
Where the author speaks of a leap in proof, legitimate as well as illegitimate,
we observe only this: nullus saltus in intellectu estpossibilis, et non alitersaltus
possibilis est, quam in enunciando." The immediate connection of a distant
ground with the consequence is, namely, a leap. In thoughts, now, such a
leap is completely impossible, but it can well occur in enunciation, and in
this case it can of course sometimes be legitimus, namely, if I believe the
other will unfailingly know what was left out and thus supply it in his
thoughts.
§411 289
The actual omission of a proposition that deserves a proof is called
petitio principii. This comes from peto[,] I beg. In the case of this kind
Reading "Polysyllogisticum" for "Der Polysyllogisticus," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiv).
See the author.
Reading "weil sie die Vernunft würcklich dencket" for "wiedie Vernunft würcklich
dencket."
No leap in thought is possible, and no other leap is possible except in enunciation.
233I M M A N U E L KANT
of conviction, namely, I have to beg the other, as it were, for his approval,
and from this we see, then, that this cannot be called a proof.
The drculus in demonstrando is the mistake where one accepts the conclusion of a proof as its own premise. This happens:
1. when one wants to prove what is unprovably true or immediately certain
2. when one wants to prove unprovably false propositions!;] in both these cases
the circle in proof is always necessary. Above all,however, it arises
3. when before any proof one is certain of the truth of a proposition that is
unprovable, then one grants the other the proof, and therefore a circle in
proof can always creep in.
§412
A proof proves too little when it proves only a part of the proposition. It
proves too much when it proves more than can be proved. A proof that
proves too little can be true, but one that proves too much is always false.
For when it is said that the proof proves too much,then this amounts to the
fact that it proves more than is true, but this is nothing other than the fact
that it is false.
§413
Finally, the author speaks some about the value of inferences of reason,
which seems to be almost unnecessary, for who will not take the use of
reason to be valuable?
234The second prindpal pan
Of the method of learned cognition
§414
Method1 is nothing other than the form of a whole of cognitions, insofar
as it is arranged according to the rules of logical perfection. Now be- 290
cause logical perfection is of two kinds, however, namely, either logical
perfection according to healthy reason or logical perfection according to
learnedness and science, method will be able to be divided in the same
way. For the rules of healthy reason are distinct from the rules of science. In all sciences and learnedness the method of healthy reason must
reign, to be sure, but everything that occurs in learnedness need not
also, conversely, occur in healthy reason. In all sciences I look not to
how something appears in employment, but instead to how it can be
judged before any employment. I look to how something can be diought
in abstracto, too[;] but if, on the contrary, I proceed according to the rules
of healthy reason, then I must show everything in concrete. The second
kind is a cognition that brings with it a certain life. The first, however,
serves only for speculation and curiosity. Now the methods of the
learned are various:
1. quoad objectum.31 I.e., as to the matter that they comprehend under themselves, or on which they are erected. For the object can be either
A. historical cognition, or
B. rational cognition. The latter includes, e.g., mathematica, and philosophy, the
former geographyand the proper history of history.2
2. Also, as to the subject. For there is
A. a method for the instruction of women, and a separate method for men.
B. a method for the instruction of children, and another for adults.
C. a completelyseparate method of instruction for people who are determined
to a low social position, and another again for people determined to a higher
social position[,] etc. Our method must be arranged completely differently
for a farmer than it will be brought to bear only on a person of average
position.
* "Die Lehrart."
>
as to the object.
* "die eigentliche Geschichte von der Historic."
235
3. These differences can also be concerned with the powers of cognition. For
there can be either
(i.) a method merely of healthy reason, or
(2.) method can be scientific, or there can also be
291 (3.) a difference of method itself in the"subject, but
(4.) the distinction in respect of the 2nd method is of course this: methodcan be
either
A. analytic
B. synthetic.
Analysis and synthesis are either as to coordination or as to subordination.
a the synthesis of coordination is the combination of the parts with the whole.
ß the analysis of coordination is the resolution of the whole into its part.
Y the synthesis of subordination is the combination of grounds with consequences.
8 the analysis of subordination, however, is the derivation of the consequence
from its grounds.
In all historical cognitions there is the connection of coordination, but
in all rational cognitions only the connection of subordination occurs. In
history, namely, I enumerate one thing after another, be it as to space or as
to time. But in rational cognitions and sciences we alwaysderive one thing
from another. In analytic coordination, namely, I go from the whole to its
parts, but in synthetic coordination from the parts to the whole.
In historical cognitions the analytic method is most advisable.First, that
is, I have to form for myself an idea of the whole, and then I make an idea
and concepts of the parts contained thereunder. In all rational cognitions
there is the form of subordination, and this, now, is either synthetic or
analytic. In the former I go from ground to consequence, in the latter from
consequence to ground.
§427
Artificial method is contradistinguished from natural method, just as a
distinction is to be drawn between a rational cognition, i.e., one that does
not contradict reason, and a cognition of reason/ where one understands
292 by this one that arises out of reason. Thus a cognition is also called natural
in two senses, namely[,] (i.) when it agrees with the nature of the object
and of the subject, and then (2.) when it arises from nature. Method" has
to be not only subjectivelybut also objectively natural, i.e., adequate to the
object.
Reading "in dem Subjekt" for "in deßen Subjekt."
Reading "Vernunft-Erkenntniß" for "Vernünftigen Erkenntniß."
Ak, "Erkenntniß"; MS, "Lehrart" (KI,Ixx).
236
§428
Methodus tabellaris,d i.e., to understand and to outline a whole science
in tables, is very beautiful. It requires insight, however, not to make too
many divisions or useless ones. The method of taking apart' a system is no
method[;] the manner of composition of the parts constitutes the system.
§429
An unnatural art is called affectatio[;] everything by means of which one
seeks to appear artful is called affected. Thus it is affected when one does
not give his art, but rather hints at an artful investigation. The affected is
commonly combined with pedantry. It becomes particularly conspicuous
when one applies a single method to everything, whether it is suitable or
not.
§43°
Socratic method occurs by means of conversations, where one extracts
everything from the pupil by means of well-arranged questions and leads
him to answers. It has great value. It is a genus of catechistic method, but
it is very tiring/
Platonic method consisted in a free speech where one is aware of no*
system.
§432
In historical sciences* one has 2 methods, the chronological and the geographical. The two can be combined with each other. The last is better
than the first. In all cognitions that hang together one must first take into
consideration the whole rather than its parts, and of the parts the large
ones rather than the small ones, the higher division rather than the lower.
§ 434 293
The author says of history that it belongs to no doctrine, but it is just as
much a doctrine as dogmatic truths. We must distinguish:
Tabular method.
"der Zertheilung."
f Ak, "erinnerend"; MS, "ermüdend" (KI, Ixxii).
* Reading "kein System" for "ein System," with Hinske (KI, bodv).
Reading "In Historischen Wißenschaften hat man" instead of "Die Historische Wißenschaft hat," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
237
A. doctrine[,] i.e., a connection of various cognitions and doctrines.
B. discipline^] when a connection is brought into a method.
C. science, when cognition is completely developed according to such a method.
Science is a complete discipline. With doctrine I direct my attention
only to what is taught, with discipline I look to die method. Doctrine and
discipline occur in historical cognitions as well as in dogmatic ones, dien.
Witii sciences diere must always be doctrine.
§435
One thinks tumultuously' when one thinks without method.
§436
To meditate is not to remember cognitions that one had but rather to
produce new ones diat one did not yef have. Methodical meditation
prevents one from not getting enough* materials for meditating. In die
beginning one meditates tumultuously[;] one has to write down what
occurs to us, as dioughts occur to us that we odierwise do not have. Let
one first write down all thoughts as they come, without orderf;] afterward
let one begin to coordinate and dien to subordinate. In every development, 3 tasks must precede
1. One writes down all thoughts without order.
2. One makes a universal plan.
3. One develops all the parts[.]
In reflection, one practices doubting, but also' the endeavor to get
proper insight into"1 everyone's opinion, to put ourselves in the position of
that opinion. It is good if one alternates meditation with other sciences
dial are relaxing.
' "Tumultuarisch."
' Reading "noch nicht" instead of"nicht," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
* Ak, "genug seine"; MS, "genügsame" (KI, Ixx).
' Reading "Nachdencken, aber auch" instead of "Nachdencken auch," with Hinske(KI,
Ixxii).
" Reading "einsehen" instead of "ansehen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
238The thirdprinäpalpart
Of learned expositions
THE FIRST SECTION 294
Of the use of words
The character of words is an object worthy of the philosopher's" consideration. Their right use is to signify a thought exactly.
§449
A terminus inanis" is one whose meaning we believe we understand but do
not in fact understand. An expression is deceptive*1 where we believe that
something is possible and yet it is impossible.
§450
A terminusfamiliaris is that expression whose sense has never been investigated because it has never been heeded.* Every language has such terms. I
say, e.g., addicted[.] On closer investigation such terms are often deceptive.
§ 452-454 et 457
The phrase learned merchandising is a deceptive business, since one puts
forth words as things[;] what is more common than this expression and
deceit! An expression that can be understood is called understandable.
Something can be understandable without being distinct. When 2 expressions have one meaning, or where their meanings are at least not very
different, then they are called synonymous expressions. If an expression has
Ak, "der Philosophen"; MS, "des Philosophen" (KI, Ixx).
empty term.
p "betrügerisch (deceptrix)" (reading "deceptrix" instead of "deceptif," with Hinske, KI,
Ixxii).
* Reading "beachtet" instead of "gebraucht," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
"Krämerey der Gelahnen."
239
more than one meaning then it is called terminus vagus ambiguus
anceps.
s
THE SECOND SECTION
Of the learned style of writing
Style' actually means a carver's tool. Here it means the character in which
one expresses one's thoughts. Everyone has his own particular style, just
295 as everyone writes his own particular hand. Style is to be considered (i.)
insofar as it is adequate to its object. (2.) To the person (subject) and the
person's social position. (3.) To those for whom one writes. For everyonea
particular style is suitable, and everyone cannot bring his thoughts into
someone else's form.
§ 473 et 475
Appropriateness of writing style consists in the fact that it is such that the
style is not too great for the thing but instead is fitting. Euphony in writing
style is something that belongs among the chimeras rather than to what is
true. The English saythat Virgil's poems sound good, but when one hears
an Englishman recite the verse, this would be insufferable to our ears.
Sonorum" consists in the mass of the syllables. Congruence consists in the
fact that the style is suited to the thing. This can only be learned by
experience.
THE THIRD SECTION
Of a learned speech
Concerning the donum didacticumv and the requirements of a teacher.
In the case of a teacher there must in general be 2 things. He must
possess (i.) the ability to descend"" toward the lower* capacities and (2.) an
ability to ascend31 toward the higher capacities.
i. Every teacher must know how to put himself in the place of his listeners[;] I
can teach another only by means of his own understanding, hence I have
a term that is vague, ambiguous, equivocal.
"Styl"; from the Latin "stilus," a sharp instrument used to carve waxen tablets.
Sonority.
didactic gift.
"eine Condescendenz."
Reading "schlechtem" instead of "Schlechten," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
"eine Coadescendenz."
240
material to work onz that already lies in the mind of the other. This is called
the ability to descend[.]a It presupposes* that one knows how put oneself in the
place of those one teaches. Only very few teachers of religion, and others, can
do this.
2. The 2nd requisitum of a teacher is the ability to ascend/ namely, that one rises
to the talents that are elevated above the average. He who knows little certainly cannot do it. The best is to choose a middle degree. How must one'' act
in public lectures, where one does not cognize the capacity of the auditores}'
§493
We must distinguish imparting-^an opinion to someone and refuting someone's opinion. In the first case the subject is empty, but in the second I have 296
to empty the subject. Before all instruction I must first have the dataL in
which the other errs. Every error is to be regarded as a phenomenon that is
worthy of an explanation. First I have to have insight as to how he could have
come to the error. Then I also have to track down the part that is true in his
error.
§501-504-509-512
Verbal dispute is when various persons believe they are disputing various
opinions, yet are at odds only in words, and are at one concerning the
thing itself. Concerning predestination, some thought that it is more a
verbal dispute than a real dispute/ An argumentum ad hominem is an
argument that obviously is not true for everyone, but still serves to reduce
someone to silence. E.g., when I get something ex concessish and from the
particular propositions that someone else has. These are good means for
getting someone off one's back and for ending the dispute, but not for
finding truth. Retorsiones' and reprehensiones' are personal controversies^] distinctions serve quite well for getting out of the trouble. An instantia is when something is said* universally and I show that it is not
Reading "bearbeiten" instead of "Arbeiten," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
"die Condescendenz."
Reading "setzt voraus" instead of "sagt voraus," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
' "die Coadescendenz."
Reading "erwähle. Wie muß man sich" instead of "erwähle, man muß sich," with Hinske
(KI, Ixxii).
listeners.
f Reading "beybringen" instead of "zubringen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
1 "Sachen Streit."
from what is conceded.
retorts.
1 reprehensions, or rebukes.
Reading "gesagt" for "gebraucht."
241
universal. A defense that is concerned with the person is called an
ogy[;] if it is concerned with the judgments of others, it is called a
refutatio.
§ 514
A formal disputation' is the action where, in the presence of learned
people, one advances a few propositions to defend them against all objections. Disputation could yield great value, if it were not a certamen personarum."1 And if one were to seek truth by means of agreement, not by
means of dispute.
THE FOURTH SECTION
Of learned writings
All learned writings are either historical or dogmatic. A writing can be
historical both as to its material, if it is something that really happened or
297 cognition of the Individuum, and as to its form. That form which is not
rational, where I do not derive by means of universal cognition of the
grounds, is called historical.
A cognition is called historically dogmatical as to form when the data
are dogmata^ but they are expounded historically. As to matter, however,
when some things are historical but others are dogmatic. Everything that
happens is considered in connection with space and time. When one
considers what happens insofar as it is at different times, however, this is
called history," but insofar as it is at the same time it belongs to the field of
geography. There are various kinds of geography and history.
The distinction that the author draws, in which he divides history into
political history, church" history, learned history, and private history, is
determined by various objects of historical cognitions. There could also
be a moral history, which considers the morals of common life and also
moral dataL. Biography is the life of a single subject. All history, of whichever kind it may be, should have the end of extending reason[;] it should
provide the material for the use of reason.
' "Eine Formelle Disputation."
" conflict among persons.
" "Historic."
° Reading "politische, Kirchen-" instead of "politische Kirchen," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
242
§520
That history which becomes useful through universal rules is called pragmatic; this can have a relation either to speculation or to practical reason.
If one learns merely the names of the sovereigns and knows their reigns,
then this provides little material for the use of reason, i.e., for speculation,
or for practical rules. In the beginning, nonetheless, one must abstract
from the use of reason and equip oneself optimistically with many historical cognitions. Learned history becomes pragmatic when one considers
learnedness in relation to human reason, if one looks to its growth or to
the causes by which it is held back. There are 2 methods of composing
dogmatic writings, either tumultuously or methodically. The latter method
brings about a system. A system is a whole. Systematic writings differ
from tumultuous writings in that they constitute a whole that fits together.
Excerpts^ are actually systems. The prindpia of dogmatists have to be 298
expounded in dogmatic writings, then pulled together and considered in
concreto. And one must mix with this something historical, in order to
provide evidence.*
§525
The method where one does not draw a cognition from one's own sources
but instead takes from those who have drawn from the source, is called
compilation. History is compiled if I have assembled it not from primary
sources but instead from later ones. One can also compile philosophy,
where one gathers together what others' have thought by means of reason.
One proves his skill, however, if, with clever selection, one pulls together
the most important things from authors who possess great acuity, from the
most thorough histories. The compilatoris distinct from the plagiarius,
of course. This last pretends to have drawn from the primary learned
sources, although he only exhibits someone else's product.
§ 526
The French, especially, are of such a caraäere that among them the sciences
grow more extensive^ than intensive^. Epitoma require much understanding,
to be able to select the most important and most comprehensible.
"Auszüge, Epitomen" (reading "Epitomen" instead of "Epitome," with Hinske, KI,
Ixxii).
* "Evidenz."
Reading "was anderen" instead of "was wir," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
243Thefourth principal part
Of the character of a learned man
The character of a learned man is of two kinds: the character of his head
and of his heart. The first is concerned with cognition, the latter with
inclination. The character of the heart has a strong connection with the
character of the head, if learnedness is to be furthered. The character of
the heart has a great influence on the direction of the understanding, and
it is therefore not unimportant even in the case of speculative sciences.
299 § 53°
The character of the head concerns understanding, reason, and taste.
The faculty of imitation is exactly opposed to the faculty of genius. Those
who possess the capacity of genius sometimes do not have the spirit of
imitation, which, on the other hand, is common to the highest degree
among those who show no genius. The Russians are supposed to have the
flaw that they lack genius and just for this reason are not able to teach it.
Hence science always dies out among them. Philosophy requires genius,
likewise belles lettres[;]s useful sciences,' however, require the spirit of
imitation. Mathematics only requires imitation. Learnedness and good
taste are distinct from one another.
§533
Native wit" is the natural capacity of the healthy understanding and
healthy reason. This cannot be learned[;] what is subsequently learned is
called schooled wit." All instruction presupposes certain cognitions, or at
least the capacity for them. It is more acceptable to lack schooled wit than
to have that without native wit. That which is learned is beautiful in man,
but he himself is absurd in its application. Pedantry arises thus, and by
means of schooled wit one becomes still more ridiculous than everf,]
"zu schönen Wißenschaften."
"zu nützlichen Wißenschaften."
"Mutterwitz."
"Schulwitz."
244
because one then has more materials. Schooled wit is a completion of
native wit.
§ 540
Particular learned exercises include
1. learning. This occurs by means of oral exposition or by means of the
reading of books. One learns either by producing a cognition or by reproducing cognitions that one possesses. To teach is actually to get cognitions
to be produced by others. The one who learns is purely passive in this
matter, but he must also be active. He must have receptivity, i.e., the
capacity of understanding, and must also apply it. Oral exposition has a
great advantage over written, for oral exposition is not as artificial as the
written. It is also more comprehensible, for there is one less action of the
mind than in reading. In reading, namely,I also have to hear in my thoughts.
§ 541 300
2. The reading of learned writings. Much depends on order[,] how one
readsf,] and on the choice of writings[,] where one begins. There is a
question as to whether compendia or great works'" should be read first. One
should not begin with compendia that contain much thought in little space,
but instead with ones that contain few thoughts in a large space. In
mathematics and in history one must first acquaint oneself with the universal. First of all one must proceed in accordance with the main thing/
Historical books that one selects for reading must first of all concern not
so much the precise facts as rather the universal ones. One must proceed
according to a certain order, and in the morning and evening read books
of speculation, at midday historical books. One must read much and, so to
speak, digest what is read, and the field must not be altered very much.
One has to read every book at least 2 times, once quickly, where one
marks the places that require clarification. Some books are of great importance and require considerable inquiry[;] these one must read often. E.g.,
Hume, Rousseau, Locke, who can be regarded as a grammar for the
understanding, and Montesquieu, concerning the spirit of the lawsf.]
§ 544
Excessive repetition is just as harmful as excessive inactivity. § 546: Imitation in matters of style is not advisable. § 548: no rule can be given for the
Reading "Compendia oder große Wercke" instead of "Compendia der großen Wercke,"
with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
* "hauptsächlich."
245
discovery of new truths. § 549[:] An autodidactus is one who makes himself
learned by means of meditation and reading. This is always a great genius.
An oral exposition is always to be preferred, meantime. One can make
more reflexiones.
§553
Learned industry^1 means the strength of the effort that one applies in
order to learn something. Man is by nature idle, and laziness is itself the
final end of his industry/ Future rest is the spur that moves men to
activity. The quantity and worth of objects can excite industry greatly.
Learned industry, if it continues, is called constant industry. Distinct from
301 this is vehement industry, which consists in excessively strong effort. The
mind suffers in the case of vehement industry[;] representations die out.
§554
One who is studying must first weigh carefully his end and the extent of
his powers[.] It is bad for others to prescribe for us our end, and for one
not to be acquainted with himself when one begins to study. One must
never study with vehement industry, but one must never stop learning.
One only knows how to judge what one has to learn when one is close to
the end. It also belongs to the character of a learned man that he is a
person without title, estate, or civic rank. Principally, that he be a man of
all estates, and that his cognition be universally useful and not be suited
merely for the form of the school[.] The final end of learnedness ought to
be to give the human race its true form, to free it of prejudices, to refine
its morals, and to elevate the powers of the soul[;] then it is a good thing
for the human race[;] but if it is used merely for operation," then it is to be
regarded only as a kind of luxus.
End of the logic
' "Der Gelahrte Fleiß."
* Reading"der Endzweck seines Fleißes" instead of "der Fleiß," with Hinske (KI, Ixxii).
* "zur operation."
246PART II
The Vienna logic
and
The Hechsel logicThe Vienna logic
Kant's
lectures on logic written
by a society of auditorsProlegomena
Everything in the world happens according to rules[;] as we perceive this
in the corporeal world, so do we find it even in the employment of our
own powers, although we are not immediatelyconscious of the rules at all.
We attain this employment through mere attempts, and from these very
attempts, e.g., teaching someone to speak or to walk, we can derive the
multitude of rules. In this way we can learn many rules by ourselves.
Grammar consists of endless rules. On this aaccount a few have held
language to be a divine inspiration, too. This much is certain, however,
that all languages, in accordance with their first principles, can be reduced
to a grammar. Moreover, grammar is a doctrine of the understanding, of
course. For as our soul combines concepts, so must words also be combined. It is too abstract to be taught in school. Let us take only the abstract
rules of the genere substantive, etc. Let us investigate more closely these
rules according to which our powers work. The understanding is the
faculty of rules itself, and only the understanding can test these rules. By
what rule does it do so? This is hard to discover, because if it errs itself,
the understanding cannot indicate the correctness of the rules according
to which it proceeds.
All rules for the use of our powers are either absolutely necessary or
conditionally necessary. Without the former no use of the understanding
occurs at all[;] without the contingent rules, the use of the understanding
for a certain purpose will come to an end. The necessary ones must be
such that they hold of the understanding without distinction among objects. They must concern only the form of the understanding.-
Note. In all thought there is matter and form. Matter concerns the
object and form the mode of treatment. Thus physiology and psychology
are distinct as to matter. As to form, if they are treated empirically, they
can be alike. Our senses give the matter of cognition." Intuition lies in the
understanding. Words are the matter of language, but grammar the form. 791
Thus a science that is occupied with the form of the understanding is
called logic.
Our understanding has various objects of cognition and of science,
such as history, mathematics - but universal logic abstracts from all this
content, from all variety of cognition, and considers in everything only the
Reading "die Materie der Erkenntniß" for "der Materie die Erkenntniß."
251I M M A N U E L KANT
form of concepts, judgments, and inferences. In short, it is one of the
sciences that prepare us for others.
riQojTCuoexmxf|* (propositiones). Every man observes the rules before
he can reduce them to formulas. Gradually, however, he attends to what
he does. The complex of all these rules is called logica naturalis. The
science that expounds these rules systematically [is called logica] artificialis. It is an affectation to label this natural inclination with the name of
science. In this way one could have a natural optics, mechanics. As said
above, logic is divided into naturalis and artifidalis. This division is bad
because logic is held to be the complex of rules of the understanding that
we employ without being conscious. Since we do not know these rules,
however, there cannot be a science. Consequently this is a contradiction.
Logica naturalis is cognition' of the rules of the understanding in concreto,
logica artificialis [is such cognition] in abstracto.
For us, then, only logica artificialis is ever called logic. We can divide'' the
laws of our understanding in the following way[:]
1. Rules for how we think.
2. Rules for how we ought to think.
Sometimes we think completely wrongheadedly. This use can never
agree with the rules. This is the misuse of the understanding and is
excluded here. Logic teaches this last, namely, how to use the objective
rules of our understanding. Logic has the peculiarity that the subjective
laws are also objective rules, because the universal rules are the sole
condition of our thought. Sometimes we give approval to a thing out of
habit or inclination. This is not a universal law. Consequently the subjective laws of willing cannot be objective laws of the understanding. Some
logicians presuppose psychology in their logic. Since this is an empirical
science, there would arise from this a science of how we think under
various hindrances, not of how we ought to think. There would be nothing
792 but contingent and natural laws. But that is not what we are asking about.
Logical rules must be derived from the necessary use of the understanding. In a grammar we consider the universal rules without which no
language' at all can exist.
There are two kinds of cognition. An apriori one, which is independent
of experience; and an a posteriori one, which is grounded on empirical
principles. Now since experience teaches us nothing but contingent
things, but universal logic abstracts from all content and consequently
rests onprincipia apriori, it is counted among the scientiae rationales. Logic
is called this, however, based on a twofold ground:
* Propaedeutic.
' "Kenntniß."
' Reading "eintheilen" for"mittheilen."
' Reading "Sprache" for"Sache."
252
1. It is drawn from reason.
2. It has reason as its object.
What belongs in the definition, however, is really only that it is rational
as to its object.
With any science the end is either to extend or to elucidate our cognitions. Logic only elucidates, because it considers form, which cannot be
extended. A universal precept that rests on grounds a priori is called a
canon. Logic is called such because it rests on rules a priori. It is a canon
of all thought, morals a canon of allwilling. - Logic is a rational science, a
canon for the understanding. Just as grammar is for passing judgment on
language as to form. Words are the matter. A science that extends our
cognitions-^ is called an organon. Logic cannot be called such because it
abstracts from all content. Just as little can it be an art, since this is an
organon of a cognition/ A few insist [that it is] the art of making definitions. But these must always be closely tested, and taste, by which to judge
according to laws of the senses, has no canon, because it arises aposteriori.
Thus logic and aesthetics are distinguished by the difference of their
objects.
Definition. Logica est scientia regularum universalium usus intellects.h
Now if logic is to be a science of the universal laws of the understanding, then these must be necessary rules, because they are to have relation to everything without distinction among objects, and without them
nothing at all can be thought. All necessary rules must be derived a
priori. Rules of experience are aposteriori. Gravity is to be found throughout the world. I will never be able to have insight that all bodies are
subject to gravity' unless I have insight into the necessity of gravity a 793
priori. A science that rests on principia a priori is called a demonstrated
science. Experience cannot be demonstrated because we first have to
prove its necessity.
Logic is thus a demonstrated science. A science that can be taught
from principia a priori is called a doctrina, consequently logic is one too.
When the rules of judgment precede the passing of judgment, then it is
called a doctrina. When the passing of judgment precedes, [it is called]
critique. For once I have the rules of experience, then I can pass judgment on them. Now we ask, What is logic, a critique or a doctrine?
Because it is to be a touchstone and is to precede our understanding it is
a doctrine. Passing of judgment critically always presupposes a doctrine.
Logic is not a critique at all, then. It can be used for that purpose,
however.
f "Kenntniße."
1 "Kenntniß."
Logic is the science of the universal rules for the use of the intellect.
' "daß alle Körper schwer sind."
253
Logic is divided into 2 parts.
1. Analytic.
2. Dialectic.
1. Analytic, or logic as critique of cognition in regard to truth, is that
part which, through the analysis of our understanding, presents the universal rules7 of the form of our understanding, hence the necessary rules of
all truth. It is consequently the mere canon for passing judgment on the
understanding.
2. Dialectic is the misuse of this canon, when we make it into an organon
and try to cognize truth therefrom. Analytic is the art of separating in
regard to our judgments. There is a great illusion that we can cognize
truth through the canon for passing judgment on the understanding, since
[cognition] is correct as to form. Since analytic abstracts from all content,
however, and considers nothing beyond form, it cannot be an organon of
new truths. Among the ancients, the dialecticians were those who disputed pro et contra. They were sophists, and sought to deceive. They
assumed false propositions, accommodated everything according to the
formal laws of the understanding, and consequently provided themselves
with a great illusion of truth. It is possible to speak in logical form of a
thing of which one understands nothing, namely, by heaping inference
upon inference, etc. - and the listener is thereby deceived. Thus logic is
misused as an art, and it becomes an organon, but not of truth. As long as
this art flourished, logic was nothing but a cultivation of dialectic as an art.
794 A century ago it was still the case that the professor who expounded
dialectic as an art was the best one. What we call dialectic is a means by
which one can cognize that something is opposed to the formal laws of the
understanding. Consequently it is only a purgative. In our judgments,
inferences, etc., we are subject to illusion through the senses. Furthermore, there are certain means of truth, which one can imitate without
otherwise having anything in common with truth. E.g., an author who
imitates the form of thoroughness, but who otherwise expounds untruths.
We are often deceived by these skills when we are unfamiliar with the
content. Agreement with logical rules is the conditio sine qua non, of
course. But this is not sufficient for finding truth. How dialectic arises one
can see in the schools. A school essay* is full of words without content.
Our author believes that dialectic is the logic of probability. But probability is a judgment concerning truth according to correct but insufficient
grounds. If its grounds are correct, however, then it belongs to analytic.
Dialectic is the logic of illusion, where this is accepted as empty. The
application of logic can only be to objects. Universal logic proceeds,
Reading "allgemeinen Regeln" for "allgemeine Regel."
"Schul-Chrie."
254
however, without distinction among objects. Consequently the canon
must be theoretical. On this account, however, universal logic cannot be
applied, either, because practical logic presupposes cognitions' and sciences, but universal logic cannot presuppose any sciences because it is a
propaedeutic.
For there is no practical part in logic, as our author opines. Otherwise
dialectic would be a pure illusion. For there cannot be a practical logic,
such as the art of education. For this already presupposes study of universal logic. All sciences are the praxis^ of logic, however, because without
logic nothing can go forward. Logic must not be divided into the theoretical and the practical part, then, but into the dogmatic and the technical
part. The dogmatic part is the canon; the technical part is the prescription
of rules for the school. Universal logic ought to consider the form of the
understanding. Therefore it abstracts from all speculation and considers
the logic of universal human reason. Here it departs from the sciences.
Like all sciences that have their concepts a priori, logic is divided into the
logical doctrine of elements and the logical doctrine of method. The
doctrine of elements is the dialectica or the analytic of reason (or theoretical logic). For it is propaedeutic. The doctrine of method is the logic of the 795
form of a system of cognitions. We can sketch a special doctrine of
method for one science or another. And this is then technical logic, or an
organon. This organon can only appear at the end of a science, because
only then am I acquainted with the nature of the science. It is the completion of the rules for its perfection, which contains all the termini technici
whereby we distinguish logical directives in critique. It is [in logic] what
the chapter on metaphor, metonymy, etc., is in oratory. It considers not
just the form of the understanding, but rather the form of systems, and is
to a great extent of dialectical content. It speaks only of various kinds of
form in systems. In art one needs manner, in science method. In the
former I act according to examples, in the latter according to grounds. It
contains the complex of all formal rules for the use of the understanding.
We have a logic of common reason and a logic of speculative reason. We
can have the faculty of cognizing rules in concrete but not all of them in
abstracto. The faculty of cognition of rules in concrete is the common
understanding^] insofar as it is correct, the healthy understanding. The
cognition of rules in concrete, or when we judge according to an experience, according to an example, is the walker for those who cannot act on
their own behalf."1 It is necessary to know rules in abstracto and to cognize
how far these rules extend. The healthy understanding serves for thinking
healthily and correctly. If it will just limit itself to what is grounded on
experience, then it will never become presumptuous. But if one wants to
"Kenntniße."
* "der Gängelwagen der Unmündigen."
255
have an understanding that is not only healthy but perfect, then one must
possess a speculative understanding. For there is a great multitude of
concepts that are too high for the healthy understanding, but which it
nonetheless needs. The logic of speculative reason is thus the faculty for
having insight into rules in abstracto.
Exposition in a science looks not just to the understandability of the
object but rather to the activity of the subject. In logic, exposition can be
of two kinds.
1. Scholastic. When it is congruent" with the desire for cultivation of
those" who wish to treat this cognition^ as science.
2. Popular, for the sake of those who do not wish to make a science of it
796 but only wish thereby to put their understanding in order[;] this is quite
beneficial for the common world* but requires much genius, because
popular logic belongs to those cognitions that involve the ability to descend/ The ancients had more popularity in their exposition because they
spoke before the people. Among the moderns, the French have advanced
furthest. Scholastic presentation is the foundation of the popular, however, since it is the foundation of all the sciences, and the latter is only, as
it were, an ornament of the sciences.
" "angemeßen."
' Reading "derer" for"denen," in accordance with Lehmann's correction (24:1102).
' "Kenntniß."
q "das gemeine Wesen."
' "mit zudendescendenten Kenntnißen gehört."
256History of Logic
[The word] logic comes from ^6705 (serrno)* and has the meaning of
reason. Epicurus called it a canon[,] a science of the cautious and correct
use of the understanding. Aristotle can be regarded as the father of logic.
But his logic is too scholastic, full of subtleties, and fundamentally has not
been of much value to the human understanding. It is a dialectic and an
organon for the art of disputation. There is much acuity in his organon.
All our logical terminology is from him. Otherwise it tends to mythology
and subtlety and is banned from the schools. Still, the principal ideas from
it have been preserved, and this is because logic is not occupied with any
object and hence it can be quickly exhausted. His logic flourished for
many centuries in all schools, until Petrus Ramus first wrote a logic in 2
parts,1 treating
1. de inventione,'
2. de iudicio."
Through his refutations of Aristotle he became the object of deadly
hatred. After them come Malebranche and Locke. This last wrote a
treatise de intellectu humano. But both writings deal not only with the form
of the understanding but with content. They are preparatory exercises for
metaphysics. Among the moderns, Leibniz and Wolff are to be noted.
The logic of Wolffius is the best to be found. It was subsequently condensed by Baumgarten,2 and he was again extended by Meier. After them,
Reuschs and Knutzen* wrote logics. Reusch is a philosopher in Jena. At
just this time the Recherches de la veritfr came out. The logic of Crusius6 is
crammed full of things that are drawn from other sciences, and it contains
metaphysical and theological principles. Lambert' wrote an organon of
pure reason. It is remarkable that one cannot give a precise definition of a
science even when it has come almost to its perfection. The cause is that 797
our reason cannot develop its ends until late, on account of their truth.
But in the end a science thereby acquires its proper perfection. Since
logic is a propaedeutic to all philosophical sciences, the concept of philosophy must be established here - cognitions of reason from concepts are
Both words mean "discourse."
concerning invention,
concerning judgment.
257
philosophical cognitions. Cognitions of reason from the construction of
concepts are mathematical cognitions. The system of the former is called
philosophy, of the latter mathematics. Cognition of reason is opposed to
historical cognition. A cognition is historical as to form when it is a
cognition ex datis. Cognition of reason is a cognition ex prindpiis, which
has been drawn from grounds apriori.
A cognition can have arisen from reason. But the way I cognize it is
nonetheless historical if, namely, I only acquire it as it was given to me.
E.g., the polyhistor who studies the philosophy of the ancients. Here the
cognition is objective^ a cognition of reason, but subjective^ historical. To
learn philosophy and to learn to philosophize are two different things.
One of the greatest mistakes in instruction is when one has an author's
system11 of philosophy memorized but does not have the author judged.
Hence it is necessary to use more reason in the method of reason. Many
philosophers boast of nothing but the imitation of someone else's reason.
It is commonly believed that mathematics and philosophy have two
different objects, that philosophy is a cognition of quality, and mathematics a cognition of quantity. We maintain that philosophy and mathematics^] in particular the first[,] are concerned with all objects. Quantities are
spoken of in philosophy as well as in mathematics. The specific difference
between these two sciences is that philosophy is a cognition of reason
from concepts, mathematics a cognition of reason from the construction
of concepts. Construction of concepts is when I exhibit a concept apriori
in intuition. Through philosophy!,] from conceptsf,] one cannot have
insight into anything in mathematics. Only with intuition does one have
insight into the construction of this or that proposition exprindpiis. Mathematics has a great advantage over philosophy, then, since all its cognitions
798 are intuitive, while those of philosophy are discursive. The cause of the
fact that in mathematics we only consider quantities is that only quantities
can be constructed. Qualities cannot be constructed but can only be
cognized from concepts. The distinction of mathematics rests, then, not
only on the objects but on form. Philosophy is the system of philosophical
cognition. Here I omit [the word] speculative, for cognition of reason
within a system must be speculative throughout. For a system is from
prindpia a priori. This is philosophy in the scholastic sense. We also have a
philosophy according to a conceptus cosmicus, and then it is a science of the
ultimate final ends of human reason. Speculative cognition of reason
differs from the common through the fact that the former is cognition of
reason according to rules in abstracto, the latter according to rules in
concreto. Cognition of reason according to rules in concrete is the popular
kind of exposition, which is suited for the common man. If it is correct,
then that is healthy reason. Philosophical cognition is speculative cogni-
" Reading "das System" for "Systeme."
258
tion from concepts. Mathematical cognitions are cognitions of reason
from the construction of concepts. I can provide evidence for a concept,*
that is, I can give an intuition of a true concept, if I provide evidence for it
a posteriori. But the mathematician provides evidence for his concepts a
priori. E.g., if I have a circle that is not really correct, I can nonetheless
demonstrate. For the representation already lies in me. Scholastic philosophy is instruction aimed at skill, true philosophy a doctrine aimed at
wisdom, which must be the highest good for our striving. It is the legislation of reason. We can distinguish artistry of reason* from its legislation.
The artist of reason or philodox, as Socrates calls him, is one who equips
reason for any end one might wish. The mathematician is an artist of
reason, likewise the logician and the physicist. But in the end one sees that
philosophy as a doctrine of reason is necessary. Philosophy, then, is an
idea of the most perfect legislation of the human understanding, and the
philosopher is the legal expert of human reason. Now since this title is so
sublime, no one can rightly allow himself to be called a philosopher. The
cause of the fact that we esteem highly someone who arranges his actions
according to the strictest laws of morality, and who never departs from the
straight path, is perhaps that morals is in fact always the end toward which
all speculations tend. Morals constitutes a unity of all cognition of reason, 799
and only he who follows its rules can be called a philosopher. Whence
comes the word philosophy? It has been attributed to Pythagoras first of
all. Not as teacher of wisdom, but [due to] the high concept he had of the
wisdom of the sublime god.
Philosophy in sensu scholastico involves two things, (i.) A sufficient supply of cognitions of reason. (2.) A correct connection of these, or a system.
For a system is the connection of many cognitions in accordance with an
idea. Our historical cognitions7 only serve for this when2 our reason can
make use of them according to its ends. Since ends are subordinated to
one another, there must be higher ends, and thus there arises among
these ends a unity, or a system of ends. The true worth of our use of
reason can only be determined through the connection that this cognition
has with the final ends. There is therefore a science of wisdom. If we call
the inner principium of the choice of various ends a maxim," then we can
say that philosophy in sensu cosmico is a science of the highest maxims of
the use of our reason. And here the philosopher distinguishes himself
more through the maxims of his mode of thought than through the connection of his cognitions. Philosophy in the scholastic sense (philodoxy) is an
"Einen Begriff kann ich belegen."
"Vernunft-Künsteleyen."
* "Kenntniße."
Reading "nützen nur dazu, wenn" for "nützen dazu, daß," following a suggestion by
Hinske.
Reading "Maxime" for "Maximen."
259
organon of skill, and the philodox is related to the philosopher as the
businessman is to the legislator in the state. If the philosopher is to
cognize the connection of all cognitions of reason with the final ends, he
must determine
1. the sources of human knowledge,
2. the beginning of the use [of those cognitions],
3. their limits. This is one of the hardest, but also most sublime things in
philosophy, which presently only a few have attained.
And on this account philosophy in sensu cosmico is also called philosophy
in sensu eminenti. Philosophy cannot be learned, because every philosopher erects his own building on the ruins of another, and if a system were
actually given to me that was so clear that it contained only irrefutable
propositions, I would still not be a philosopher if I memorized all its
propositions. I would not learn to philosophize then, but would only
800 possess a historical cognition, without knowing the sources from which it
was drawn. One can also say here just what one can say in jurisprudence:
The legis peritusb in the highest laws of reason is the true philosopher. The
leguleii' in the highest laws of reason are the sophists and the dialecticians,
who provide themselves with a certain illusion of wisdom, and with this
seek to accomplish certain ends by force.
Man needs two things in philosophy:
i. A cultivation of our skill. This is necessary because for all ends we
need a skill in the use of all means to these ends. One can just as little be a
philosopher without cognitions'' as one can become a philosopher through
mere cognitions/ The best principles of our mode of thought have no
lastingness unless the science of wisdom secures them. Innocence is
amiable, but not secure against seduction[;] instruction about all that can
tempt, and about the origin of errors into which [innocence] can mislead
us, must also be added. He who has hatred toward all the sciences, and
who pretends that wisdom alone is to be esteemed, is called a misologist.
Epicurus is criticized for wanting to produce a doctrine of wisdom
whereby all the sciences would be given up and misology would be introduced. Misology commonly arises from the fact that someone feels himself empty of all skills. There is also a misology, however, among those
who have extensive cognitions/ and here it arises from the fact that these
cognitions* were unable to satisfy them. Only philosophy can provide this
legal expert.
pettifogging lawyers.
"Kenntnisse."
"Kenntniße."
"Kenntniße."
"Kenntniße."
260
inner satisfaction. It closes the circle, and then it sees how all cognitions*
fit together in an edifice, in rule-governed ways, for such ends as are
suited to humanity.
2. In considering philosophy as skill we will look more to its method
than to the purpose toward which it is directed. Of course we will also
turn our view toward the highest maxims. Since we are directed by the
method how we are to learn to philosophize, however, and since philosophy consequently places the human spirit in the greatest freedom, it
deserves the greatest attention. No people on earth began to philosophize
earlier than the Greeks, since no people thought through concepts, but
instead all thought through images. They first began to study rules in
abstracto. Which people investigated the concepts of virtue, of the highest
good? The Egyptian wisdom is nothing but child's play compared to the 801
Greek, and modern authors have proved that the Egyptians did have
surveyors, to be sure, who measured fields according to a certain accepted
standard, but they did not understand anything about mathematics. The
Greeks were the founders of mathematics, who demonstrated it from first
grounds and elements. They are the core of the human race and its
benefactors. In Greek history it is obscure where philosophy arose. The
Thracians seem to be the most insightful and the earliest. The fragmentists among them are Orpheus and Musaeus. The wise men in
Greece had nothing but sentences and moral sayings, which had long
been known among the people. Sentences are thoughts condensed into a
familiar expression, in order to inscribe them in memory more easily. One
among them is noteworthy, and from him all philosophy proceeds[:]
Thales, who, on account of his acquaintance with natural science is also
called physicus. He is the founder of the Ionian school. His followers are
Anaximander and Anaximenes. It is remarkable that the language of the
poets was the first one in which things that are objects of reason were
expressed, so that philosophy is greatly hindered by poetry. Pherecydes
was the first philosopher to write in prose, and soon after him Heraclitus.
Their writings seemed to everyone quite obscure, because at that time
philosophy was wholly new. The language of the poets is astonishingly
rich in ideas. The works of Homer, Hesiod prove that. But at that time the
ideas had not yet been made free of corporeal secondary meanings. These
were followed by the Eleatic sect. Its founder was Xenophanes, and after
him Parmenides. They taught that in the senses there is nothing but
deception, and only in the understanding is there truth. Here philosophy
becomes much enlightened and breaks away wholly from the poets. Zeno,
a man of great acuity, belongs to this sect. - What wasunderstood under
the name of dialectic at that time was the pure use of the understanding.
Hence there are great encomia for dialectic among the ancients. The
261I M M A N U E L KANT
doctrine of the highest good was reckoned to it, [and also] that concerning
that being in us which thinks, etc. When the understanding breaks away
from the guiding thread of the senses, it runs the risk of losing itself in
labyrinths. Hence it is comprehensible how such a use of the understanding could have fallen into mere subtleties. From these arose the current
name of dialectic, which pedants know well how to use. About the time of
802 the Ionian sect, Pythagoras founded the Italian school in Magna Graeda.
He is the only one among all the philosophers who had something peculiar. He was a great mathematician, and he knew how to bring music
under mathematical laws. He founded a society of philosophers, who were
bound to one another through secrecy. He expounded geometrical doctrines only to his friends. This philosophy spread throughout the land. Its
essential points, which they taught, were to provide much more moderate
concepts of the gods than the people had, and somehow to oppose the
machinations of the princes. It was in fact a kind of free-masonry. Finally
they acquired such a reputation that all the cities wanted their regents to
come from among the pupils of Pythagoras, who lived in Crotona. - He
believed in the transmigration of souls, but one cannot say much about
this, because he had nothing but secrets. - [He] played with numbers. At
about this time a man appeared in Greece who opened a new pathway
among speculative minds, [asking] how one is to attain the highest goodf:]
Socrates, whom Xenophon describes as someone who comes closest to
the idea of a wise man. He possessed a great skill for cornering the
dialecticians by means of questions and answers[;] this is called Socratic
irony. His follower was Plato, and the latter's follower was Aristotle. The
former cultivated the practical part of the Socratic philosophy, and the
latter brought speculative philosophy to greater perfection. Now follow
the moral philosophers. The Epicureans founded all virtue on an ever
joyful heart. The Stoics founded virtue on a renunciation of all pleasure of
life, and in the elevation of the soul. Although the Epicureans taught many
things that were erroneous, they were nonetheless the best natural philosophers among all the Greeks.
The foremost schools* ofthe Greeks hadspecial names. - Plato's Academy was not an individual building but rather an open place under the
open sky among the most outstanding buildings. It is divided into 3 parts.
803 i. The Academy of Speusippus, who still remained a faithful follower of Plato
and who taught completely dogmatically.
* Note i. The opinions of individual men were called schools.
2. The cognitions were not regarded as objects to be learned by youths, rather, oldpeople
also occupied themselves with them.
j. The philosophers at that time had an influence on the public and on the constitution of
die state.
4. If they were moral philosophers, people demanded of them not only their doctrines,
but also the confirmation of those doctrines through their own examples.
262
2. of Arcesilaus. He was a mere doubter. Thus it happens that the
academid are also called sceptici. Plato expounded his doctrines dialogically,
and in such a way that he did not decide, but rather let there be dispute on
both sides. Now the method that suspends the matter and makes it probable
that it could be otherwise easily finds approval.
3. of Carneades, who was likewise an extremely subtle and dialectical doubter.
The lyceum or gymnasium was Aristotle's school, and because he commonly walked in the square with his followers they were also called
peripatetid. He had no famous followers. Theophrastus and Demetrius
Phaleraeus wrote no books, and they also did not extend Aristotle at all.
A porticus was a covered walkway, a picture gallery, and the school of
Stoic sect. In speculative philosophy these latter were mostly dialectical,
but in morals quite practical. Their founder was Zeno of Citium. His
most famous followers are Cleanthes and Chrysippus. They laid the
ground for the most magnanimous principles in the world, although
their doctrines are idealistic and too high for realization.'
Hortij the school of the Epicureans. These latter did battle with the
Stoics and in the end were pushed aside by them, because everyone
esteemed such high principles. Lucretius's book De rerum natura is the
only one that was written according to their principles. Besides die sceptici
academid, the skepticism of Pyrrho is also noteworthy. The dogmatici maintained that truth can be proved exactly. Pyrrho maintained that philosophy
lies in the balance of our judgment and in the skill of being able to
uncover all false illusion, without otherwise being able to prove anything
decisive. But since men are more timid than eager to tear things down,
this sect found little approval. Sextus Empiricus is noteworthy because he
collected all these doubts.
When the philosophy of the Greeks came to the Romans, it did not
increase in the least. Cicero follows Plato in speculative philosophy, the
porticus in moral philosophy. In natural philosophy only Plinius Secundus
accomplished anything excellent.
When the Roman Empire was overrun by the barbarians all culture
disappeared until the Arabs, in the loth seculum, spread through the
Occident and began to cultivate the sciences. All philosophy was taken 804
from Aristotle, who was followed in a slavish way. In the loth seculum the
scholastic school arose, which produced nothing but commentaries on
Aristotle. Since Aristotle, as is known, had worked on nothing but speculative reason, people dealt only with astounding subtleties in logic and
metaphysics. About the time of the Reformation, the remaining scholastics were swept away. Immediately after the scholastics the sceptici rose to
"Ausübung."
' Gardens.
263
prominence: Huetius,8 Bayle,9 Hume, who were called antilogid. Then
came the eclectici, i.e., philosophers who did not cling to any sect particularly. This improvement is not to be attributed to any circumstance more
than to the Studium of nature, which was combined with mathematics.
Order in thought was thereby furthered. The Lord Chancellor Baco de
Verulam10 contributed to this in his organon for the sciences, in that he
called attention to the method in physics, namely, to observations and
experiments. Cartesius was the first to take this path. Leibniz in Germany
and Locke in England gave direction to speculative reason, in that they
sought to purge it of all scholasticism and to bring everything to distinct
concepts. —No philosopher has ever had such extensive skill for philosophizing dogmatically as Leibniz. It is dangerous because there is much
that is false in our dogmatic propositions on account of the illusion of
experience. Thus it is better to criticize the truth. - Locke treats philosophy psychologically, i.e., as someone who analyzes the human powers of
cognition. Since his time, people in our own country have begun to study
the human soul. In our times natural philosophy is flourishing to the
highest degree. In morals we are still not much further than the ancients.
Some base morals in willing, others in self-love, etc., etc., as with the
ancients. As for what concerns metaphysics, after we have gone through
all the parts we hesitate, and because of the great difficulties one finds
among us a kind of indifferentism toward this study. Status anceps.k This is
the age of critique for this study, and the time is near when its building
will be torn down and a wholly new one will be built on the ruins of the
old. In other respects, only metaphysics is true philosophy, and in it lie the
real sources from which the understanding derives its use of reason.
* A condition of uncertainty.
264Tractatio Logices1 805
OF COGNITION
All our cognitions can be considered in two relations.
1. In relation to the object. This is representation.
2. In relation to the subject. This is consciousness of the representation.
Representation cannot be defined because for that one always needs
new representations. All representation is either sensation or cognition. It
is something that has a relation to something in us. Sensations do affect,
but they quickly vanish, too, because they are not cognitions. For when I
sense, I cognize nothing. Cognition is of two kinds, either intuition or
concept. The former is singular, the latter universal. For a concept belongs to all.
In all cognition matter and form are distinct. Matter means the object,
form the way of cognizing the object. With form, it depends on consciousness. A cognition of which I am conscious is called clear. If I am not
conscious of it, it is called obscure. Consciousness is the standard condition for all logical form in our cognitions. Hence obscure cognitions are
not objects of logic, because no logical rule that is obscure to us can help
us.
All our clear representations can be distinguished logically into distinct
and indistinct representations. Indistinct representation is the consciousness of a representation as a whole, but without distinguishing the manifold
that is contained in the whole. Distinctness is clarity that also extends to the
parts. All the Wolffians call an indistinct representation confused. - But
the opposite of confusion is not distinctness but rather order. Indistinctness
is of course an effect of confusion, not confusion itself. There are also
indistinct cognitions that are indistinct not through confusion but rather
through lack of representation. The concept of something is completely
simple. Here neither order nor confusion can be brought in. There are two
kinds of distinctness of cognitions[:]
1. A sensible distinctness in intuition, when we are conscious of the manifold
that is contained in the intuition.
2. A distinctness of the understanding in concepts. When a cognition is devel- 806
Ak., "Tractatio Logices"; MS, "Tractatio Logices."
265
oped not as to content but as to form and the various parts of the representation that lie in the understanding are developed.
All our cognitions are either intuitions or concepts. The faculty of
intuition is sensibility. The faculty of concepts is the understanding, and
to cognize something through concepts is to think. Intuition, however, is
only concerned with something individual, concepts with something that
several things have in common. From another side, sensibility is so defined"1 that it is a receptivity, a capacity to be affected by objects. The
understanding [is defined] as a spontaneity, a faculty of representing
things as they are, not as they affect us. Sensibility is consequently the
lower faculty of cognition, because sensibility gives me the material for
thought, but the understanding disposes over this material. There are two
kinds of perfection of cognitionf:]
1. Perfection according to the laws of sensibility, aesthetic perfection.
2. Perfection according to the laws of the understanding, logical perfection.
One of the aesthetic perfections in exposition is that a case in concreto
gives intuition to the rules in abstracto and makes them sensible, but it
must not be put in place of the understanding, for then the understanding
would be ruined[;] rather, intuition must be its companion. Concepts
without sensibility have no object at all. The condition of all our concepts
lies finally always in the senses. Intuition is therefore a very necessary
thing. And although it sometimes misleads the understanding, the understanding is itself culpable for not investigating it better. A cognition is
perfect according to the laws of sensibility if it is new, easy, lively, perfect
according to the laws of the understanding if it is thorough.
Logical perfection rests on the agreement of cognition with the object,
aesthetic perfection on agreement with the subject. The rules of agreement of cognition with the object must be necessary and must hold for all
cognition and for every understanding, for because my cognition is to
agree with the object, it must also agree with that of others. Aesthetic
perfection rests on the particular laws of human sensibility, and it is thus
807 not universal for all creatures. But since objects are represented not only
through concepts but also through intuition, there must also be necessary
and universal laws of sensibility. Herein lies the concept of the beautiful.
The ground of sensible satisfaction is subjective, to be sure, but subjective
with respect to all of humanity. E.g. Music. Symmetry. What agrees with
the laws of the understanding, however, holds not merely for men but for
all thinking beings. But logically perfect cognitions can at the same time
have an aesthetic perfection, too. For certain philosophical expositions are
called beautiful.
Among all the properties of aesthetic perfection, none is more congru-
™ "erklärt."
266THE V I E N N A LOGIC
ent with logical perfection or more essential to aesthetic perfection than
intuition. It is the form of sensibility, whereas sensation, stimulation,
never give universal laws in this way. - Beauty, distinctness, and universality are 3 essential parts of logical perfection. He who wants to convince his
listeners must not waken their sensations but must instead present the
matter to their intuition.
Sensations, e.g., stimulation, excitement, are the matter of sensibility,
intuition is its form. Imagination also holds only for the form of sensibility,
but not for its matter. The essential aesthetic perfection is the opposite of
the logicalf;] distinctness of intuition is nothing more than liveliness in
aesthetic truth; the principal thing is not that cognition agree with the
object, if only it agrees with our laws of sensibility. The poetically true is
not what is logically true, but instead what accords with illusion. Common
prejudices have aesthetic truth.
The universality of concepts is the opposite of that which aesthetic
perfection involves. In the latter case things are supposed to be represented universally in concrete, in the former universally in abstracto. Aesthetic perfection contains the essentially beautiful if it is beneficial to
logical perfection, the non-essentially beautiful if it is detrimental to it.
What belongs to sensation and not to intuition contributes nothing to
concepts. What someone senses he can never tell, unless the other senses
it too[;] hence this belongs to the non-essentially beautiful. The pleasant
involves stimulation, which is often mixed in with the judgment of taste[;]
hence we love women on account of their delicate design, which, however, 808
compared to the strong design of men, is an imperfection according to the
universal rules of taste. The sublime involves excitement, but this is quite
deceptive. Thus the church orator must seek to achieve the end of his
sermon not through this but through distinctness, truth, and universality.
For sensations are always opposed to logical perfection. If the thing excites, then it hinders thorough inquiry, and the judge can be corrupted by
tears. Disturbances of the mind do injury, in that they often promote the
opposite of the intended end. Hence the preacher must make use of
intuition, and must speak in images and likenesses, when an object is
presented to us but no consciousness of the alterations of our condition is
united with it. Logical perfection is the conditio sine qua non and the basis
of all thought. Aesthetic perfection cannot exist by itself, but is only the
ornamentation of already correct logical perfection. Now one can, to be
sure, leave something out of logical perfection. But one must not mutilate
it. One can also, as it were, ignore some of the truth, since one cannot
make it wholly universal, yet without in the least causing any lack in logical
perfection. Poetry is reckoned first of all under aesthetic perfection. In it
logical perfection is somewhat less in degree than aesthetic perfection,
and aesthetic perfection always struggles with logical perfection for a
place. But the needs of human nature require that sensibility and under-
267
Standing go as a pair, and the greatest learned man cannot break away
from all sensibility. From this arises popularity, or the ability of the understanding to descend, when it departs somewhat from scholastically correct
cognition in order to become more comprehensible. Only one must take
care with aesthetic sensations that our attention not be led from the object
to the subject. Gentle excitement can give occasion for further reflection,
to be sure. But it is not sufficient for conviction.
Our intuition is enriched through history, which gives us cases where
that which the concept says in abstracto can be expounded in concrete.
Through observations from common life, moreover, for which good instruction is given in Spalding's sermons,11 if only they are not shouted
809 down by sensations. - A short while ago much was said of sensations. He
who speaks much about feeling cannot think, however, but everyone can
feel.
From what has been set forth there arises a unification of the aesthetic
and the logical in cognitions. For a cognition can be thorough and logically
perfect, but at the same time dry[;] it can be beautiful but at the same time
shallow. Cognitions" that have the end of instructing, and which in this
case have to be thorough, can be dry.Others are only supposed to entertain, hence they may always be shallow. Some ought to contain both. To
contrive this requires much genius. For the understanding requires insight, sensibility requires easiness. Hence there is a kind of conflict between the two,where one must make the choice as to which is closest to
the end, which satisfies mostf;] e.g., mathematics can attain the tasteful
only late, because everything must be expounded convincingly.
The perfection of cognitions in general is
1. logical.
2. aesthetic.
3. practical perfection.
Logical perfection is concerned with the understanding and is the
cognition of objects through it. Aesthetic perfection is concerned with
feeling and with the condition of our subject, namely, how we are affected
by the object. For through the beauty of cognition I do not seek cognition"
of the object but of the subject. Practical perfection is concerned with our
desires, through which activity is effected.
The perfection of a cognition rests on 4 principal points.
i. On the quantity of the cognition, in that a cognition is universal. A cognition
that serves as a rule must be more perfect than one that holds only in particular cases.
"Kenntniße."
"Kenntniß."
268THE V I E N N A LOGIC
Logical perfection as to quantity or in regard to the judgment is universality. That of aesthetic perfection is common validity.p
2 quality, distinctness of the cognition. Contains the quo modo.q Logical
perfection as to quality is distinctness, [that] of aesthetic [perfection is] liveliness.
3 relation, truth of the cognition. Truth is the relation of cognition to the
object. If a cognition passes over into moving the mind/ then the truth is
concerned only with my subject and is aesthetic truth. Logical perfection as to 810
relation is objective truth. [That] of aesthetic [perfection is] subjective truth.
4 modality, insofar as it is a certain and necessary cognition. Logical
perfection as to modality is the necessity of cognitions according to the understand-
, ing. [That] of aesthetic [perfection is] empirical necessity
With aesthetic perfection one can think of
1. subjectivetruth. This is the agreement of cognition with the subject's mode of
thought. Appearances of ghosts, etc., are aesthetically true. The sun, etc., has
aesthetic truth[;] logical truth is not at all demanded here. The poet needs
only aesthetic [truth], how it appears to our senses and seems to be. The sun
sinks into the water, says the poet. If he were to say that the earth turns on its
axis, then he would assimilate to logical truth and not be a poet.
2. Subjective distinctness (relatione) in intuition, when I fix the rules of objects
through examples[;] portrayal. If I wish to cognize something according to
aesthetic perfection in regard to liveliness of intuition, then it has to be quite
lively. If, e.g., someone wishes to cognize spring logically, then he judges as to
quality and has everything distinct through a single mark. The poet speaks
here of a multitude of things, of the twittering of birds, etc. It is quite lively,
however.
3. Aesthetic universality, i.e., popularity, that a cognition is suited for the sens
commun. I must presuppose the way I judge, the way everyone else can judge.
Here, then, there is subjective universality/
4. Necessity and certainty of aesthetic perfection, that a cognition of the senses
is necessary, i.e., that the experience and voices of all men confirm it. Subjective necessity is custom.
Manifoldness and unity constitute every perfection. Our power of cognition strives very much for manifoldness. But it has the need that it must
have unity. Otherwise it would not satisfy us, because cognition without
unity, when one thing is not connected with the other, does not increase
our cognitions/ In the case of aesthetic perfection, e.g., the painter must
know how to group the manifoldness of the figures so that a unity
' "Gemeingültigkeit."
' inwhatway.
"Geht eine Erkenntniß zu Gemüthsbewegungen über."
Reading "Allgemeinheit" instead of "Deutlichkeit," which is Lehmann's suggested rendering of a series of dashes in the MS.
' "Kenntniße."
269
811 emerges, if his painting is to please. Truth is the pre-eminent ground of
unity and the most necessary and pre-eminent thing. Without truth there
is no cognition. In logical perfection it is the positive, greatest condition,
With aesthetic perfection it is the conditio sine qua non and the foremost
negative condition, since here it is not the principal end, which consists in
pleasantness and agreement of sensibility. Because, however, no satisfaction can arise where the understanding does not join in and uncover
errors, with aesthetic perfection there can be no contradictions. Noman,
accordingly, can make progress in things of taste unless he has made
logical perfection his basis. Most of what is produced by those who fashion taste" in Germany is extremely disgusting, if one reads [by comparison] the products of foreign peoples who have not studied the belles lettres."
True aesthetic perfection is found in [the] Spectateur,12 Sulzer,'3 Wieland,14 in whom one notes that they have their heads full of ideas and that
they add all the contrivances in order to persuade the mind, in order to
accommodate themselves to the comfort of taste. Certain books have
nothing attractive about them, although they are quite thorough, namely,
because their authors never thought about giving their exposition verve,
about enlivening them. - Logical perfection is the skeleton of our cognitions. He who has learned something thorough,"' therefore, can easily
relax logical strictness and add beauty. - Novels and phantasies, which go
beyond the [normal] course of things and make the heart faint. History,
geography, reading the ancients, which unite both perfections, anthropology [too], must be our instructors and must make the spirit more alert. No
science can be beautiful. For science contains universal rules, which precede their employment. Feelings can be combined with the beautiful, they
can please and excite us, but they contribute nothing to the play of our
representations as powers of cognition, though they do as sensations, of
course. They are not as universally communicable as intuitions' and concepts. Stimulation and feelings belong to the essentially beautiful, approximately as a golden frame belongs to a beautiful picture.
One must pass judgment on the beautiful more from its effect on
sensibility than from the understanding, however, since beauty is agreement with sensibility, but the understanding alone is the faculty of rules.
812 Taste cannot be reduced to laws, then. For a law serves not just for
passing judgment but for action that follows it/ The rules of taste are
empirical, but these do not make our judgment true; rather, they only
serve to bring our judgment under certain concepts when it is cultivated
through much practice. Taste, accordingly, cannot in any way be treated
" "Geschmackskünstler."
" "schöne Wissenschafien."
* "etwas Tüchtiges."
' Reading "Anschauungen" for"Vorstellung."
7 "zur Befolgung."
270
as a science. Hence, too, there are no beautiful sciences.2 Fine arts" are
arts that occur, not according to logical rules, but through empirical attempts. For only the effect distinguishes the rules of sensibility, which
recognizes* no rule of the understanding, and on this account, too, we
have no rules of taste. Aesthetics" cannot be a canon, then; rather, the
attempts of the fine arts always precede, and then the rules follow, which
serve, however, only for criticizing art. Thus one must acquaint oneself
with models of beauty, in order to acquire taste thereby. For in taste, man
is subject to fashion and is inclined to complaisance. Someone has taste if
what pleases him pleases all. And thus the social inclination of all has
produced and modified taste. Now the ancients have withstood the critique of many secula and thereby retain their prestige, and he who reads
them and on whom they leave an impression, acquires taste, only he must
not try to imitate them. Taste is an effect of the power of judgment. This
power comes later than wit, and even later than understanding. It shows
how we can make use of the judgment of sensibility[;] in order to choose,
consequently, one must have collected a multitude of cognitions/ Our
cognition has need of a certain means, and this is language. This means,
however, is subject to many alterations. Hence one must write in a dead
language. Affectation and straining for beauty are displeasing to the highest degree/ The natural understanding, in its simplicity, is better. We can
occupy ourselves in two ways[:]
i. per otium 2.per negotiumf
All occupation with taste is play. Occupation with the understanding is
true business. Considered as play, the former deserves all approval. But
if the play seems to be business, then it is exaggerated. E.g., if in a
speech someone tries to be witty, then his play becomes business. In no
language are there two words that are actually synonyma. Least of all are
philosophy and learned cognition synonymous, as our author holds;
rather, they are vastly different. A science is a system. It is thereby 813
distinct from universal cognition, whatever this may be as to its object[.]
Naturalists in the field of the learned are those who lack the systematic,
and who possess nothing but a rhapsody. One can comprehend a system
better in oral exposition than from books, since in the former one does
not engage in as much reasoning as in the latter, but instead a certain
thread is followed.
* "schöne Wissenschaften."
° "Schöne Künste."
* "erkennet."
' Reading "Aesthetik" for"Aesthetisch."
' "Kenntnißen."
' "Der gesuchte Zwang und Grimaße desSchönen mißfällt imhöchsten Grade."
f i. through leisure 2. through labor.
271
A science can be:
1. A science of reason, which can be cognized only according to universal
principles of reason. E.g., mathematics.
2. A science of learnedness, which one can learn historically. Such as history,
languages, philology, acquaintance with all the tools of learnedness, literature.
A philosopher is not a learned man; rather, he looks at what the value of
learnedness finally is. He must possess learnedness, however, in order to
be able to make use of philosophy. He is not an artist of reason, then, but
rather one who studies the laws of reason. To become learned is to imitate
someone else in what he knows; consequently the pupil can never become
more learned than his teacher. Mathematics can be learned. But many
new things can be found through it, too. Philosophy, however, cannot be
learned, but philosophizing [can], since we expound more the judgment
about the thing than the thing itself. He who begins to memorize philosophy removes himself further and further from it. For in man there lie
judgments which, if they are not contaminated by adopted propositions,
are plain and pure.
Our author divides imperfection into defectuss and vitia.h
In metaphysics we have[:]
1. defectio privative dicta' (defectus)[, which] is to be reproved to a slight extent,
namely, when dryness, but also thoroughness, reigns in a work. Lack is the
non-being of a cognition. - Ignorance is lack of cognition.
2. Defectio contrarie dicta1 (vitia), when, e.g., vitia grammaticalia and affectations
appear in a letter. There are logically essential vitia and logically non-essential
ones. In our language some contradictions prevail. I go out alone with someone
else. The English call that a bull. Such a mistake belongs to the essential vitia.
814 An error is a vitium of judgment. Since logic expounds universal formal
rules and abstracts from all objects, aesthetic and practical perfections
cannot really belong to it; rather, these are regarded as digressions*and as
things not proper to logic. Practical cognition actually influences our will.
But it is taken up here so that we can cognize logical perfection all the
better, and distinguish it from other cognitions. Practical perfection is
determination of the ends of human actions. Aesthetic perfection is popularity. The horizon is the congruence of the limits of our cognition with the
ends of mankind and of men. Thus it is a complex of cognitions' which,
taken together, are adequate to our ends. Now we can consider either the
ends of all mankind, i.e., the absolute horizon, as well as the particular
* defects, lacks.
* errors.
' imperfection in the privative sense.
' imperfection in the sense of a contrary.
* "episodisch."
' "Kenntniße."
272
horizon, i.e., the horizon of one man, which is consequently a horizon that
is determined relatively. As for what concerns the particular horizon, the
horizon of an uncultivated man is different from the horizon of an expert.
The former learns sciences without setting before himself a certain end. At
the most, in order to be able to speak in society[;] the latter, in order thereby
to become useful to others. The horizon of a religion is a catechism, i.e., a
complex of cognitions'" that are necessary to man as man. It presupposes a
cultivated understanding, however, to determine the cognitions" of all persons and the nexusL of all useful cognitions" among one another[;] moreover,
[it presupposes] a power of judgment that has [been] matured by years and
by experience. - To determine the horizon of universal human cognition
logically is not possible everywhere. In metaphysics one can, on some
matters, see the limits of human cognition. In natural science, however, this
cannot be done, due to the great extent of this study. It is possible that it
could sometime happen, though. In the case of the aesthetic determination
of the universal horizon it depends on how the aesthetic horizon is situated
relative to the logical. If it is to be universally useful, logical [perfection]
requires distinct truth and certainty, which need not be found so exactly in
aesthetic [perfection]. We must look more to logical perfection, however,
and at least the ratio between the two must be exactly determined. Some
things I cannot know. These are over my horizon. Other things I need not
know. These are outside my horizon. E.g., the medicus as medicus need not 815
know all the legal procedures. What is it useful to know, however, and what
can I do without? Gesner's expresses himself about this in his writings and
lectures about his Isagoge, in that he lingers over the amusing question of
those who ask, about everything, What is the use ofthat? What is the use of
being acquainted with the dress of the Hebrews? Thus: quaerit delirus, quod
non respondetHomerus.p What is not useful now can be useful sometime. E.g.
When, by experiment, a new law is given in nature. If only you have really
extended and justified your cognitions,* acquaintance with their use will
come afterward. This answer is sufficient for the determination of the
universal horizon of men. For even he who collects the absurdities of men,
and who, among all human endeavors, is of the least use, since he only
establishes, as it were, a catalogue of the rubbish in the world, can still be of
some little use in regard to history.
The horizon is the concept of our cognitions/which cognitions, taken
together with the ends we have, are adequate. It is
i. logical. In relation to our faculty of cognition, how far we can go and
"Kenntniße."
"Kenntniße."
' "Kenntniße."
p
a madman asks but Homer does not respond.
* "Kenntniße."
' "Kenntniße."
273I M M A N U E L KANT
how far we must go. Everything must be aimed at perfection. Hence we
can go as far as we get.
2. The horizon in relation to taste is aesthetic. This is popularity. One
seeks to win the approval either of the public or of experts. In the first case
one seeks current learnedness, which is suited for everyone and is pleasing. But in this way one ends up with shallowness, as is the case among the
French.
3. Practical^ in relation to use. But in regard to particular ends, one
must always ask for the higher purpose, and have a universal and determined ground for doing this or that. E.g. If the theologian wants to play
the role of a learned man, then theological learnedness is the most important thing of all. He must study natural theology, in order to oppose the
free-thinkers, and also physico-theology, because of the difficult eventus*
in the holy scriptures,' mathematics, theologia sacra, etc., etc. But as
preacher and as teacher of his parish he need only have clear ideas of the
truths that he expounds, in order to find their importance. The expression
over the horizon is not really adequate to the thing. For what is on the
816 horizon of the sky I can see. We see quite well that we should represent
what lies outside the surface on which all our possible cognitions" are
contained. Historically, human cognition0 has no limits. For human experience extends it continuously. The limits of mathematics cannot be determined, since new things are constantly added. But the horizon of the
cognitions of physics in general is quite restricted, because it is occupied
merely with objects of sensibility. As for the extent to which our reason
can depart from all experience, no horizon can be indicated. That which
we ought not to know is beneath our horizon. This can be said relative^. E.g.
When someone brings religious disputes to the pulpit, then the public gets
things into its head that it ought not to know. The most important use of
this doctrine concerning the horizon is the relative use. I can always say,
relatively, that something is beyond this man's horizon, if he becomes
cultivated. But one can err in this, too, if one does not set about it
properly. In the extension of his horizon man stands, as it were, on a
mountain, and describes a greater radius^ for his circle. But be cautious
that you do not endlessly change your horizon and take another centerpoint. For all connection of your cognitions will thereby disappear. Hence
we must have a certain center-point, on which all our cognitions come
together. And this must occur in the first years of study. And one must
enrich his understanding with historical cognitions, to be sure, if one
wishes to collect a supply for the whole of life. For only at this time is the
memory capable of taking in things that do not die out perpetually. But
' events, occurrences.
' "indenh. Büchern."
" "Kenntniße."
° "Kenntniß."
274
with the growth of judgment the acuity of memory comes to an end.
Moreover, we must know how to determine the horizon of our cognitions
properly at the beginning. But commonly men attain this insight too late,
when they see where the horizon should have been determined. And this
stems more from the negligence and the amusements of youth than from
ignorance. The horizon of other men can be determined according to the
variety of [their] cognitions. In instruction, exposition must be arranged
according to what my pupil, in these years, takes an interest in; subsequently, as a youth, he will have yet another interest, and thus I must
always comprehend the horizon of my student. I must not make it too
narrow, and, e.g., in the pulpit I must not place too little confidence in
the comprehension of common people. Sciences have a horizon. That is 817
the territorium of the science[;] hence some things do not belong in the
territorium of the science, which nonetheless need to be known in the
science.
The imperfection of our cognition is
1. ignorance, the imperfection of lack, which thus constitutes an empty space.
2. Error, an imperfection of enrichment,1" when I have collected ideas that conflict with the truth.
The fate of someone who errs is worse, then, than that of someone who
is ignorant, for error hinders the entry of truth. To remove it one must
first reduce the man to ignorance. Thus it is a double imperfection. For it
is not only a negative lack of truth, but also a cause for resisting perfection.
With all science there is risk. But irrespective of this, we must run the risk
of error, because otherwise one could never make progress. Two things
bring about error: ignorance, and the desire to know, which actually
produces it. Ignorance is not a great reproach if the opportunity to know
certain things has been lacking. The name of idiot is supposed to mean
someone ignorant, in the way that the ancient sophists distinguish wise
men and idiots/ But the pride with which an idiot regards himself is illadvised/ The name is appropriate, not for one who is ignorant, but for
one who presumes to judge of all things, although he knows nothing. In
common life the remark is made that it is quite useful that a man should
not do the whole of a thing. An ignorant man is one who does not have as
many cognitions2 as he needs in regard to this or that end. E.g. In the
production of a needle more than 4 to 10 people cooperate. This division
makes everything perfect, and everything easy. It is like this in cognitions,"
"der Bereicherungen."
"Idioten Dummköpfe."
y Reading "womit sich ein Idiot betrachtet, ist übel beraten" for "womit man einen Idiot
betrachtet, ist übel berichtet."
"Kenntniße."
"Kenntniße."
275
too. One man finds pleasure in rummaging through archives, another
holds this to be empty. Ignorance is not a reproach, accordingly, because
in part we men do not need to know, and in part we are not able to know.
Cognition* of one's own ignorance is a science, which involvesa cognition'
of empty space, in which possible knowledge can be found. The common
man is ignorant with respect to astronomy. But he does not know his
ignorance. It is quite necessary, then, to uncover for man the chasm of his
818 ignorance, and this can be done only by those who have extended their
knowledge and hence have insight into how little of it there is. Helvetius
says now one knows everything except what Socrates knew, namely, nothing.'6 Opposed to this ignorance, on the other hand, is great knowledge/
1. Historical polyhistoria, learnedness extended without' determinate limits.
2. Knowledge of reason extended without determinate limits, polymathia. The
two together can be called pansophia.
In the sciences, then, there is a difference between those that can be
drawn from reason and those that must not be taught based on reason,
such as geography, etc. In the previous seculum the inclination of most
men ran toward polyhistoria. This requires also philology, i.e., cognition-^of
the tools for the study of the ancients/ in which the models of historical
cognition have been brought down to us. Philology, under which are
comprehended the linguist and the humanist, and also the literator, constitute polyhistory. The philologist must be a literator, he must be a humanist, i.e., he must cultivate his taste and be able to communicate to others.
Now for the cultivation of taste he takes the classical authors, i.e., [ones]
who are models and exemplary. A linguist is one who studies ancient
languages with critique, and if he chooses them as models of taste, then he
is a humanist. Only the ancients will always remain models of genuine
taste, because their languages are dead languages. Now the literator is one
who can name many books of the ancients, as to their editions, their
authors. He who is acquainted with many books is a literator. He who is
acquainted with many languages is a linguist, and taken together these
constitute the great learned man. This is great knowledge/ of which Paul
says that it inflates. For if the polyhistor is acquainted with so many books,
he believes he knows just as much as those who wrote them, although he
is acquainted with them only historically. Philosophy can tear down pride
and make evident one's true ends. Learnedness without philosophy is
* "Kenntniß."
' "Kenntniß."
1 "das Vielwissen."
' Reading "ohne" for"nach."
7 "Kenntniß."
1 Reading "zum Studium der alten" for "der alten," following a suggestion by Hinske.
* "Vielwissen."
276
cyclopic learnedness. Philosophy is the second eye, and it sees how all the
cognitions' of the one eye agree with reference to a common end. One
part of philosophy is called the humaniora. The character of humanity
consists in sociability. The humaniora are liberal arts/ A liberal art is
merely play, a bread-winning art* is work. What belongs to fine art, however, is not yet wholly liberal,' for the painter, etc., is still mechanical. The 819
poetic art and oratory are more liberal. A humanist is one who treats
beautiful things and cultivates his spirit in the study of the ancients, in
order to drive out its wildness. There arises thereby that urbanity that we
are aware of in the ancients, and historical cognition is of importance in
this respect, that it drives out rusticity.
All these cognitions'" can be drawn together into a main science and are
regarded as means to that science. So, too, even the bread-winning science that people study. It is customary among men to prefer to do something out of inclination rather than due to the compulsion of duty. Some
are often failed by their inclinations, which do not advance them. This is a
man's hobby-horse, and he would rather ride it than ride the cart-horse of
his office. Since duty, then, is something from which you like to be free,
learn something with which you can play with your reason. E.g., the study
of botany, of geography, etc.
These secondary sciences must be reflected on in accordance with the
plan of our knowledge. Often they are the necessary means in a science.
E.g., a medicus must have natural science as an aid, and philology, moreover, because being well read provides a multitude of experiences. Often,
however, they are only a play of entertainment, and are set out for anyone's liking. There is difference of scientists between bread-winning art
and free art. And thus learned people are either members of learned
guilds or are independent of guilds."
A learned man is often opposed to those who practice mechanical arts.
The learned man is thus accepted as one who does no manual labor. Thus
the learned men in Siena let the nails on their hands grow, as proof that they
do no manual labor. A science is a bread-winning art when it is a means of
livelihood!;] if it should interest only the spirit, and civilize the talents, then
it is a liberal art. Bread-winning arts are thus major moving springs of
activity, but the sciences are greatly restricted by these bread-winning arts,
since in them one must direct himself according to universal delusion[;] for
if truths are not immediately of any use, one must nonetheless expound
them, because the public has gotten used to that. Thus some things that are
' "Kenntniße."
1 "freye Künste."
* "Brotkunst."
' "frey."
" "Kenntniße."
" "entweder Zunftgelehrte, oder zunftfreye Gelehrte."
277
received and that appear in examina could be struck from logic. In short,
members of learned guilds are bound to their metier. - Liberal art has
820 many advantages here, since it is not restricted to the conditions of the
trade, and what is sought is not at allthe delusion of the multitude but rather
the inner worth of the sciences. Yeton the other hand, liberal art does not
have enough motive power to compel men enough to apply themselves to it
with great effort. Gallantry and pedantry are mistakes in the use of our
knowledge. The word pedant is Italian and has its origin from magister
pedarius," who was placed in charge of a young man and followed him at
every step. He had to instruct the young man in sciences and in scholastic
learnedness, but was never admitted to his father's societyf;] hence he did
not learn to make any use of his knowledge in intercourse with other men.
In the use of our cognition, it can be suited either more to the school or
more to the world. The school contains precepts and methods, i.e., means
for teaching and learning. A cognition is scholastically correct, then, when
it contains all the forms according to which one is supposed to teach.
Every science has 2 perfections, a scholastic one and a popular one.
Scholastic perfection consists, then, in didactic form, which serves to
make cognition easier for a beginner. It constitutes the essence and the
ground, it is agreement of the use for our reason, and is the meticulousness of logical rules. It is the exposition, then, that can be either scholastically correct or popular. Popularity consists in the accommodation of a
science to the power of comprehension and the taste of the common
world/ Such a cognition is not just for the school but also for the world. -
Scholastic method gets accustomed to a certain fussiness, e.g., termini
technici, demonstrations, definitions - which are not suited for a dilettante. Nonetheless, the scholastic style is the greatest perfection, and
always the first thing, in that it contains the certain rules of our procedure,
and without them all thoroughness would vanish. Scholastic perfection
must precede, then popularity follow, for to start with popularity is quite
absurd. But if we dedicate our cognitions to human society, then we must
put these rules aside and yet retain as much science as is congruent with
the power of comprehension and the inclination of others. Popularity
requires familiarity with the world and intercourse with men, and he
821 understands his subject best, certainly, who can make it comprehensible
and clear to someone else who is not learned. But with popularity one
must not abandon thoroughness, since it is nothing but an alteration of the
exposition. - Now pedantry is restricted capacity in the use of cognition,
when one is restricted merely to the scholastic use. It is considered pedantry when, in abstract concepts, someone begins with Adam. It indicates
a certain thoroughness, however. Pedantry is fussiness in the formal,
" a teacher who goes on foot (i.e., one of little repute).
f "des gemeinen Wesens."
278THE V I E N N A LOGIC
micrology, trading in trivialities. The pedant is a bad copy of the methodical mind, who establishes the right end for his knowledge, and who also
knows how to attain it. A pedant, however, with his great learnedness,
never gets to his end. There are pedants in all positions, e.g., pedants of
the hunt, pedants of war, pedants of finery and of politeness, who always
talk about their own thing and are occupied with it. The learned pedant is
the most bearable. For in his case the objection is only lack of familiarity
with the world, although one can otherwise learn from him, even if one
finds no pleasantness in doing so. In the other areas, however, pedants are
empty-headed. Besides pedantry, gallantry can also join with cognition.
Someone is gallant if he grants superiority to someone based on the care
with which he has refined himself, superiority that he does not claim for
himself. Among the ancients the concept of gallantry was wholly unknown. Horace, Carmina, Book II, Ode 16, To Grosphus, when he
praises his patron, ascribes to him superiority in possessions, [but] to
himself superiority of spirit, and thus obviously gives himself the advantage. In general, one does not find among them the least delicacy about
indulging others. - No people has more gallantry in writing style than
France. Most books there are accommodated to the taste of the fair sex,
and hence women are also the judges of scientific objects. In social intercourse they must set the tone of conduct, of course, but to water down
whole sciences on their account, until the sciences are congruent* with
their capacity, causes shallowness, and scholastic perfection loses its
worth in the process. The Germans fail miserably, and they show something embarrassing' in their character when they try to equal the French in
gallantry. This gallantry is dangerous because it is so stimulating and
seductive that, because the entire public shouts its approval, we value this
more highly than the reproach of learned men.
The quantity of learned cognition is extensive according to the multi- 822
tude of the cognition, or intensive according to its importance, i.e., in
regard to its consequences and effects. We can consider this importance
1. in a logical respect, where it is that which contains logical perfection, namely,
that through which cognitions become more thorough, more distinct, and
more certain[;]
2. its practical importance consists in the usefulness of the cognition. This5
cannot be foreseen and must therefore be developed. Logical perfection
teaches practical perfection, since usefulness thereby becomes more determinate. Thus it is the first perfection. But a cognition can have' logical perfection respectiveL.
angemessen,
"etwas genirtes."
Ak, "Dieser"; MS, "Diese."
Reading "haben" for "ganz haben."
279
Fruitfulness of cognition is concerned with the quantity and multitude
of the cognition. The content of cognition lies in the manifold and indicates its parts. The perfection of cognition requires that it be true. Truth
is agreement of cognition with the object. But this is really only a nominal
definition[;] this is one of the strangest phenomena in a science, when one
cannot answer a question that constitutes the essence of the science. Such
a question has long been posed in logic, namely, What is truth? Pilate was
the first to raise this question. Here [logic] appears to run aground,"
although it tries to give rules of truth to the understanding. The definition
above is not suitable. For the object is not in us," only the cognition of it is.
Hence we cannot compare our cognition of it with the object, but only
with our cognition. Since, then, no cognition is true except that which
agrees with the object, no cognition of the object is true except [that]
which agrees with our cognition of the object. The ancients called this a
diallelon,"" a fallacy. E.g., when, to prove his sincerity, someone appeals to
the sincerity of someone else. Thus Lavater1' maintained many things
based on endless inferences, and spoke of the character of the future life,
which has not the least semblance of incorrectness or opposition about it.
But does this cognition have an object that agrees with it? Such cognitions
are then called empty. Thus cognition is true if it agrees with itself. But in
this way all lies can be true, if they need no other confirmation than the
823 agreement of ognition with itself. - Is there, now, a universal criteriumL of
truth? A rule, by which universal truth may be distinguished? It is impossible. For it is supposed to be a universal criterium^ of truth, without distinction among objects. If it were a criteriumL for certain objects only, then it
would not be universal. But since it must abstract from all distinction
among objects[;] and since all truth is agreement of cognition with the
object, in which case the cognition of one object is distinguished from
another[;] and since the cognition of universality has no characteristic
mark whereby an object is distinguished^] a material criteriumL of truth is
therefore impossible. The matter of all cognition is the object, the form
the mode of treatment. Logic is concerned with form, truth with the
object. Hence it is impossible, in the first place, and contradicts itself, to
give a universal material criteriumL of truth. Since logic abstracts from all
content, however, there can only be formal critieria of truth. Truth requires two things[:]
1. Agreement of cognition with the object.
2. Agreement with itself.
" Reading "zu scheitern" for "beym Namen zu scheitern" (MS, "beym Hafen zu
scheitern").
" "bey uns."
* Reading "diallele" for "dialectic," in accordance with Lehmann's correction (24:1102).
280
Agreement of cognition with itself, regardless of the objects, is a formal
criteriumL of truth. For this makes a cognition possible as cognition. Without this no cognition at all is possible. Hence it is always indispensable,
although it is not sufficient for a material criteriumL. It is a conditio sine qua
non, e.g., the principle of contradiction is a formal criteriumL of truth. For
someone who expounds a logic so fine that it agrees with itself, however,
this criteriumL does not suffice. Thus the answer to the question, What is
truth? would be the agreement of a cognition with itself, and this is a
partial ground for holding it to be true. A universally sufficient material
criteriumL cannot be demanded. - If I abstract from all the different objects, then I retain only a concept of an object. A universal criteriumL of
truth deals only with the form of thought, which is agreement of the
cognition not with the object, but with itself.
The rules for agreement with itself are[:]
1. A cognition must not contradict itself. This is the conditio sine qua non.
2. Affirmatio, if cognitions as grounds fit together with their consequences. If,
e.g., as the ground for the dampness of the west wind, I cite the fact that it 824
comes over the sea, then that is a partial ground of truth. The inner criteriumL
of truth requires that a cognition be grounded. A mteriumL that rests on the
prindpium of sufficient reason must always infer from the ground to the
consequence.
3. Among various cognitions there ought to be unity, i.e., the relation of many
cognitions to one.
Opposed to truth is falsehood. When falsehood is held to be truth it is
error.
1. Falsehood, i.e., a lack of agreement with the object.
2. Illusion of truth.
Is truth possible? In logic, truth is an agreement of cognition with the
laws of the understanding^] since the understanding acts here according
to its own laws, there is nothing here to make it absurd that truth should
be possible. Is error possible? I.e., to what extent is the form of thought
contrary to the understanding possible? It is hard to comprehend how a
power can deviate from its own laws, since it acts only according to certain
laws. If these laws are essential, then the power cannot deviate from
them[;] if, then, among the formal laws of the understanding that logic
expounds an essential one is possible, then the understanding cannot
deviate from it. E.g., a heavy body cannot cease falling. - If we had no
sources of cognition other than the understanding, we would opine that
the understanding would always judge simply according to its laws, even if
it sometimes judged restrictedly[;] but through the understandingwe have
no object, since it contains merely form. Sensibility, i.e., the faculty of
intuition and of sensation, provides the material for thought, and it is the
281
other source of cognition. Now if a cognition is to be related to the object,
then the two work togetherf;] sensibility gives intuition and the understanding the concept. When a body is affected by 2 powers, there arises a
third movement, where it does not remain on the track either of the one or
of the other, i.e., the diagonal force. E.g., a ball that would have gone
directly into the center of the target goes somewhat toward the edge of the
target when it is pushed sideways by the wind, and it was pushed there
neither by the power of the [gun]powder nor of the wind. Now sensibility
825 influences the actions of the understanding, and from this arises the
understanding's diagonal direction, where it sometimes attains truth,
sometimes illusion. The cause of illusion is sensibility, then, and the
understanding, insofar as it passes judgment concerning this. Sensibility
is not in itself a source of errors, however, for insofar as it relates to its
objects, there is an agreement with the laws of this power of cognition.
The ground for the fact that the senses do not judge erroneously is that
they cannot judge at all. For only the understanding judges. Error is
neither in the understanding alone, then, nor in the senses alone; instead,
it always lies in the influence of the senses on the understanding, when we
do not distinguish well the influence of sensibility on the understanding.
Logic, since it abstracts from all content, cannot say more of the influence of sensibility than that it presents the subjective ground of our
judgment. The understanding is the objective ground of our judgment.
But when something subjective, which in fact belongs to sensibility,flows
into our judgment, then sensibility has mixed itself in, and this is the
source of errors. From this mixing arises cognitio hybrida, a bastard cognition, which is composed of 2 parts. Here sensibility does not serve the
understanding but instead confuses it, and from this arises the diagonal
direction of the understanding. E.g., someone who adheres to an opinion
holds the opinion to be something probable. Probability is an objective
ground. But subjective adherence brings the effect that is taken to be
objective. - Because the understanding is in fact active in every error,
men always bring out truth when they judge at the risk of error. Those
who make many errors always have something true, too, for they have
used their understanding and cultivated their powers.
With regard to error, we cannot complain about the restrictions on our
understanding, either. Then we indict nature. For the restrictions on the
understanding are the cause of ignorance, but not of errors. For when in
ignorance, I need simply not judge. Hence we are ourselves responsible
for every error, when our inclination draws us out of our limits. In all our
judgments there is always something true. A man can never err completely and utterly. For in accordance with what he perhaps presupposes,
he can always have some truth, even if only partial. A total error would be
a complete opposition to the laws of the understanding. But then it could
826 not arise from the understanding, which can produce nothing that con-
282
flicts with its nature. What is deviant from its laws is the influence of
sensibility. In every error there is always still a true judgment, but much
from sensibility is also insinuated, so there is falsehood in it, but it is only
partial.
Since we abstract from all relation to the object, and consider only the
rules for the agreement of the understanding with itself, the criteriumL of
truth in logic can only be the agreement of the laws of cognition with
themselves. The rule of agreement of cognition with itself is the principle
of contradiction and the principle of sufficient reason, which are not
sufficier* materialiter, but are sufficient to judge of a thing formaliter,
whether it agrees with itself. The principle of contradiction is a negative
proposition. A cognition is false if it contradicts itself. But a cognition that
does not contradict itself is not therefore true. The principle of contradiction is such, in fact, that nothing can be opposed to it, but as a positive
principium for cognizing truth it is not sufficient. It is positive insofar as
through it I can have insight into the necessity of the truth in a necessary
cognition. - The principle of sufficient reason is when a cognition fits
together with a ground, or when nothing but true consequences can be
inferred from a cognition. Both propositions, then, press for unity. - If a
cognition does not contradict itself, but instead its opposite would contradict itself, then it is true. If a proposition does not contradict itself it is
possible, but from the principium contradidionis not all the unity of a
cognition can be inferred. E.g., that my thoughts penetrate into the souls
of other men is possible, but not on that account true. When one cognition
is the ground of others, then there is a connection of the two cognitions.
When the ground is true, so also is the consequence true. If all the
consequences are true, then the ground must be true too. The principle of
contradiction is treated diligentlyin metaphysics, and that the criteriumL of
truth is the principium rationis.*
1. A priori[,] the connection of a cognition with its ground.
2. A posteriori^ the connection of a ground with its consequences.
A cognition without a ground is groundless but still not false, e.g., that
plants have souls[;] but that a cognition be true, this requires grounds, and 827
that the cognition be connected a priori. We infer from the consequences
to the truth of the cognition
i. negatively[.} [I]f even a single consequence is false, then the whole
cognition is false. For if the cognition were true, then this consequence
would also have to be true. Among false consequences people also include
dangers. But dangers are often only relative dangers, and often they rest
only on external circumstances, if, e.g., the times are so bad that even
truth brings danger. What is relevant here, then, is not the dangerousness
principle of the ground.
283
of the proposition, but its falsehood. Those who start [talking about]
dangers are looking for tricks to defeat someone before he can use reason.
2. positive^. In cognizing the truth of a proposition it is not possible for
me to infer from the truth of a few consequences to the truth of a
cognition. The cognition can have some truth, and from this the truth of a
few consequences arises. The remainder can be false, however. Hence I
cannot infer the truth of the cognition based on such a ground. If all the
consequences whatsoever are false, then there is nothing true and nothing
healthy in the cognition. The positive inference is thus the onus probandi,y
where I must show the truth of all the consequences. In the case of the
negative inference, however, I need only show the falsehood of a few
consequences, and hence this is a sufficient criteriumL. Only it is difficult,
however, indeed, it simply cannot happen that I could know all the consequences. For if I knew them, my cognition would be certain. But we need
this, and so we make this probable inference. If most of the consequences
are true, then they are all true. For if a cognition does not contradict itself,
then I search for its ground, and I examine the consequences of that
ground. If many consequences can be discovered, but not all, then I
accept it as an incomplete cognition, in that I infer from the truth of
various consequences to the truth of the proposition. For since it is impossible to show the truth of all the consequences, it follows that we also do
not have any strict, sufficient usefulness of the criterion, but can only use
it as a ground of probability. Here the principle of sufficient reason is
treated not as in metaphysics, where it holds of the object, but rather as a
logical proposition. For since the principle of contradiction is not yet a
sufficient criteriumL of truth, the connection of the cognition must nonetheless be investigated through it. The principle of contradiction isthe princi-
828 pie of the co-existing and of agreement,2 the principle of sufficient reason
is the principle of connection."
A cognition is totally false or partially false. A cognition can always be
false and yet one can discover partial truths in it; e.g., there is more truth
in polytheism than in atheism. - In disputations there are certain subtle
fallacies for confusing others. E.g., one who says, All Moors are men. The
respondent is a man. Therefore he is a Moor. The respondent is a man, to
be sure, but not a black man, and hence he does not speak completely
falsely. It is often good to search out this truth and not immediately to
throw away everything that contains an error. We can argue in 2 ways,
either because we have different interests, and then we argue as enemies,
or we have a common interest but do not agree about the wayto promote
it, and then we argue as friends. All men have a common interest in the
burden of proof.
"der Satz des zusammen bestehenden, und der Einstimmung."
"der Satz des Zusammenhanges."
284
investigation of truth, and hence we must be participants in such argument, in that we do not dwell on showing where the other has erred, but
rather on where he is right. Now this sympathetic sentiment*is moral, to
be sure, and does not properly belong to logic. But logic prescribes its
rules as correct maxims. If we believe that a proposition is wholly false,
then we must simply recall our proposition from above, p. 85,l8 that no
proposition can be wholly false. One can invent a total falsehood, of
course, that no one will hold to be true. But this is not an error, then. If
the thing is so false that there simply is no interest in seeking out any
degree of truth in it, and hence it is beneath all observation, then it is
absurd. Thus if the falsehood is clear to the universal understanding, the
cognition is absurd. The distinction between total and partial falsehood
concerns either the object or the cognition. The lack in a cognition is the
partial falsehood of the cognition (vitium), or the cognition is wholly true
but does not touch the whole truth of the object (defectus). With partial
falsehood, it is a matter of a lack of the totality of the truth of the cognition, not of the totality of the truth of the object; if this incorrectness does
not constitute the essential end of the cognition, then it is true tolerabiliter.
E.g., prejudices in religion, which one must seek to tolerate and to
correct. We have noted that a cognition is such that not everything is
true in it as cognition, or that the whole cognition is true, but the whole 829
truth of the object is not present. E.g., he who tells a story and hides a part
of it does not on that account lie. For he only makes use of cunning here,
and it is sometimes necessary and unavoidable,too, to keep a part secret.
One conceals when one merely hides something, and if the whole of the
object is not contained therein, the cognition in this case is true. - This
examination of how many errors are found in a cognition, and whether on
this acount this or that cognition has to be attacked, is of great importance
and presupposes much prudence, which has to be grounded on a power
developed through experience. - With regard to exact and crude cognition, a distinction is drawn between them. Exactness has to do with the
relation of the cognition to the object, with whether the object is cognized
wholly or in part. E.g., the determination of breadth by steps is sufficient
and exact for the determination of a journey, but not for the determination
of the boundaries of an estate. With numbers, fractions can be left off if it
is exact enough for payment. But a businessman closing his books may not
leave off Via, because then the balance, which is the proof of the correctness of the account, is not exact. Thus a cognition can be exact for one
purpose but can be called a crude estimate for another purpose. Exactness
often looks like pedantry, when it is exact objective^ in matters where this is
not required at all for my purpose. E.g., with fortifications the ancients
always determined how many cubic inches would have to be carted out to
"Diese theilnehmende Gesinnung."
285
complete a moat. Scrupulous exactness is distinct from exactitudo or
precise exactness, in that precise exactness is appropriate to the end, and
just on this account receives the name exactitudo. In the sciences that rest
on principles a priori, exactness is extraordinarily important. E.g., in
mathematics. Most modes of thought are almost never concerned with
the exact, and there are few thorough minds who observe exactness in
all things, though this exactness has its great worth and must never be
neglected, since it elevates the power of judgment even if it is not
immediately appropriate to the end, and if it also requires only a little
effort.
There are judgments en gros and endetail. Madame Geoffrin'9 was a great
Maecenas20 to learned men, although she herself was not a great genius, in
that she encouraged accomplishments, and said that one must judge of
830 every man en gros, because he would lose much if one were to pass judgment
on him en detail. But anyone can pass judgment en gros. E.g., the book
pleases me, it is beautiful. But not [everyone can say] what is in the book,
find fault with it and praise it en detail. Our modern, great, so-called geniuses learn sciences engros, and hence all their judgmentsand cognitions
are en gros and never en detail. From this arises superficiality in cognition.
On this account it can never become exact. Exact cognition is distinct from
subtle, scrupulous cognition, i.e., exactness that is concerned with parts,
skill in noting something that more easily escapes common attention, which
is also called the microscopic in passing judgments. A cognition is micrological when one clings to small things and cannot see the big things on
account of the small ones. Subtle exactness is on this account not micrological. For the subtle mind can nonetheless be extended by concepts in
regard to cognition. For we must distinguish objects not only at great
distances but also on small points. But some restrict all their cognition to
small things, and a subtle mind is commonly micrological. What is diametrically opposed to subtle cognition is crude cognition. Diametrically opposed, if one falls out of one mistake into the one opposed to it. Both are
open to reproach. For he who clings much to subtleties is blind with respect
to the whole. It seems that more can be expected from crude cognition,
however, which is concerned with large things andwith thewhole. - Crude
cognition is not crude error, which contradicts the common laws of the
understanding; rather, it is crude insofar as it is not extended, and is still
rough, and contains marks of a merely common understanding. Our author
says that all truth is dogmatic. - Allour cognitions are either historical or
rational. Cognitions are historical if they are communicated to us from
elsewhere[; they are] subjectively rational insofar as they are drawn from
principles of reason. [They are] objectively rational insofar as the cognitions lie in reason as to their true sources. Objective [ly] historical cognition
is possible only by means of the senses and of communication and instruc-
286
tion. Philosophy is in some people historical subjectiveL[;]c objectively, all
philosophy is cognition of reason. - All rational cognition is at the same
time apodeictic, i.e., it carries with it the proof of necessity. Only through
experience can I cognize contingent things[,] but through reason, on the
other hand, [I can have]necessary cognition, too. Philosophyand mathematics, accordingly, are apodeictic cognitions. That the stone is heavy I cognize 831
through experience, to be sure. But only reason gives me proof of the
necessity of heaviness. Apodeictic propositions are of two kinds[,] mathematical insofar as they belong to mathematics, dogmatic insofar as they
belong to philosophy. Accordingly, all cognition of reason from concepts is
dogmaL, all cognition of reason from construction of concepts is mathema. If
I say that every body is divisiblef;] this is an apodeictically certain
proposition. - In revealed religion propositions that contain doctrines
which reason cannot cognize are called dogmata^. This is an improper
expression. Only if our reason were extended would it have this cognition,
and then they would be dogmata^, although now they are only historical
cognitions.
Our author calls a complex of dogmatic truths a system. - But the
object of systematic and of common cognition does not make any difference; instead, the two are distinct only as to form. A system is where
everything is subordinate to an idea that is concerned with the whole, and
that has to determine the parts. E.g. Someone can know many histories
without having a science thereof. For he does not have the form. He did
not make himself a sketch of the whole, and did not order everything
according to an idea. This idea, then, makes systematic form. We can
think the system as an aggregate or whole of cognition. Totality, now, is
the determination of the whole, and this lies in the idea. With an aggregate, however, nothing is determined. For I do not know what is still to be
added. With a system, however, everything is already determined. - A
cognition can be rhapsodic, and nevertheless not be tumultuous. For what
is opposed to the tumultuous is the methodical, and without method a
cognition is tumultuous. But a cognition that is produced methodically,
but without system, is rhapsodic. E.g., when we guide ourselves in accordance with the power of comprehension of the subject who is to be
instructed.
Some have expounded their subject through aphorisms, without representing the articulation of the whole, in that this is always there but cannot
be seen by one who does not have the idea of the whole. It is necessary,
then, to treat things systematically in order to get a concept of completeness and to have a touchstone for how the different parts agree with the
Reading "Die philosophic ist bey Manchen historisch subjective" for "Die subjective
philosophic ist bey Manchen historisch."
287
832 whole. With sciences one must always have their skeleton before one's
eyes in order to pass judgment, in accordance with this, as to whether this
or that belongs to the science. - Aesthetic truths are ones that are suited
for universal comprehensibility[;] logical truths are scholastic, or as our
author says, learned.
A false cognition and an error are distinct. If I propound and examine a
false judgment, there is not yet any errorf;] error is the holding-to-be-true
of falsehood. Thus illusion must be added, and, to be sure, logical illusion. With optical illusion, the senses are deceived. Moral illusion is when
that which serves our best interest seems to arise from duty. Logical
illusion arises from the pure form of the understanding. Now our cognition can well be in accordance with the understanding as to form. For I
can easily imitate form without having internal correctness of the propositions, and thus logical form itself gives an illusion of truth, of which
sophists often make use. No error is unavoidable in itself, because one
simply need not judge about things of which one understands nothing.
Ignorance can well be unavoidable. For this does not always rest on our
will, but often on the restrictions of our nature. With error, however, we
are ourselves always culpable, in that we are not cautious enough in
venturing a judgment, for which we do not have enough cognition/ There
are cases, however, where something must simply be judged, and here it
happens that someone falls into an error that was in this relation unavoidable. E.g., a man wishes to cross a river that is frozen. By accident,
however, the ice at one place is thinner, and he drowns. If he could have
judged this beforehand, he would not have gone over. Error is always
something positive[;] not being true, however, is something negative, for
the positive thing in an error is that it is nonetheless thought. Illusion is
the subjective ground of an error. An incorrectness and a falsehood is
obvious if it is clear to the common human understanding. If the incorrectness is not clear to every understanding, then it is hidden, but it can be
made obvious, and all refutations aim at this. In the case of refutations, it
is a duty first to show whence this or that incorrectness of human cognition has come, i.e., I must discover the source of the error, i.e., the
illusion, and afterward I can prove to him the falsehood. For if I do not do
the former, and do not make distinct enough for him the means by which
833 he has been misled into holding this or that to be true, then I leave him
still in uncertainty and doubt. Hence I must also not call someone absurd
immediately. For he would certainly not have accepted this or that cognition if he had not been led by this or that hidden illusion to hold it to be
true. Such a man, who immediately calls someone else absurd, insults the
other very much and fails to recognize the interest of universal human
reason. That which contains an obvious falsehood is an absurdity. But one
d "Kenntniß."
288
cannot prove an obvious incorrectness to anyone. For through some misunderstanding or other it is not obvious to him. The expression absurd,
stupid, has to do first of all with the error itself[;] secondly, it has relation
to the person who has the error. For I thereby declare it to be unworthy of
being accepted in the class of the universal human understanding. If I
have declared my refutation of die judge whom I hold to be stupid, then I
cannot have the purpose of instructing him. For by denying him common
human understanding, I have declared him unworthy of instruction, and I
would act stupidly myself. My refutation would have to be directed to
others, then. But others who have healthy human understanding will see
the absurdity by themselves. Hence it is not good to use these expressions.
One must instead let an absurdity go, unless it carries with it something
hateful that I have to remove from it.
He who merely senses and does not judge does not err. Thus every
error lies in judgment. Judgments are actions of the understanding and of
reason. One can saygenemliter that objectively, truth is agreement with the
object; subjective truth is agreement with the laws of the understanding
and of reason. The understanding agrees, then, with its own laws or laws
of the understanding. We have a faculty of the necessary and the contingent^] thus we have employments' of the pure understanding. This part is
called transcendental philosophy. Our understanding is of a special kind,
in that it is not capable of any intuition. For only the senses can do that.
Now a second power comes into play, namely, sensibility. We have spoken
of the understanding in regard to error in judgment. We have cultivated
our understanding so much, now, that it does not err by itself. The senses
also do not err by themselves. Why? Because they do not judge at all. In
our sensibility there is something that is related merely to the object, and
that is intuition, and something that is related to the subject, and that is 834
sensation. Clarity of cognition involves marks/ A mark is a ground of
cognition, principally, too, in the comparison of diings. In comparison, I
look to the identity or diversity of things. We need marks not merely to
distinguish things, as our author holds, but also to discover their agreement. E.g. I do not want merely to distinguish a sheep from a goat, but I
also want to know wherein it agrees with anodier sheep. - Marks can be
regarded as a positive representation of the whole representation of the
thing. A cognition is distinct, accordingly, when we are conscious of its
partial concepts and represent these to ourselves clearly. Now if these
partial concepts are divided again, then I get marks of marks. These parts
of marks are called subordinate marks, through which our cognitions
climb to universal and higher marks, which are common to most things.
E.g., what is virtue? A mastery over die inclinations. What is mastery? The
' "Beschäftigungen."
f "Merkmahle notae."
289
power that one has over another. What is power? etc. Through these
subordinate marks arises deep distinctness, where one penetrates further
and further. - Wecan have marks through coordination, in that twomarks
are compartes? E.g., a body is an impenetrable whole, (i.) a whole (2.)
impenetrable. The latter does not apply to the whole; rather, both are
applied to the concept of body, which, as complementum, they comprise.
The series of coordinate marks can go on to infinity. E.g. Gold is heavy,
extensible, refractory, does not rust, etc., etc. There is still not completeness here. For one could discover 1000 more such marks. A cognition
becomes distinct, then, through clear marks. Now a cognition can become
distinct through an aggregate of coordinate marks, and then it grows
extensively with the addition of each new mark. I take many new marks
until they seem to constitute the whole aggregate. One proceeds this way
with definitions. In a certain respect they can have limits, namely, for this
or that end. Cognition also grows through the series of subordinate marks,
however, in that one analyzes marks and pulls out of them new marks,
835 which already laywithin the cognition, to be sure, but which were not yet
clearly represented. It is more pleasant to extend one's cognition through
coordination than subordination. The latter is hard, since one must attend
to a concept whose marks become subtler and subtler, until they are
finally not capable of any more division. Nevertheless, this division has
limits. This is intensive quantity of distinctness, which makes the understanding do more, to be sure, but which extends cognition more and
makes it exceptionally correct. Here marks are not added, but instead I
only decompose* the concept, since I do not join mark to mark, and hence
do not add anything, but instead break into parts. This way of continuing'
the series of marks involves a progress that is limited, for I finally come to
partial concepts that are irresolvable, and I come to the concept of the
simple. A cognition is distinct when the marks themselves are clear. If I
can set forth clear marks, then I can explicate my concept of a thing.; If I
cannot set forth any marks, then I cannot explain to another person what
he does not understand, but instead must make do with examples. The
quantity of distinctness through coordinate marks is extensive distinctness.* The quantity through subordinate marks is deep (intensive) distinctness. —Poets want to exhibit everything distinctly in intuition, and on
account of this purpose they coordinate marks in a thing in order to make
the distinctness extensive. The poet is distinguished from the philosopher
through the fact that the latter works for the understanding, the former for
sensibility. To be sure, the poet must observe logical correctness to the
f equals.
* "decomponire."
' "prosequiren."
' "so kann ichmirüber ein Ding expliciren."
* "die ausgebreitete Deutlichkeit (extensive)."
290
extent of having unity. But his proper end has to do with pleasing sensibility. The reading of poetry has great value, then, in that it provides our
understanding with the faculty of extensive distinctness, which is the
easiest and most entertaining distinctness of all, because it is acquired
historically. Deep distinctness is a matter for philosophy, and it depends
on the fact that I pull out one mark in addition to another, and continue
this until they become microscopic. Cognition is not extended by this;
rather, we descend to the depths. It is used most of all in metaphysical
investigations, where I always seek for die ground of the ground, without
adding new ones. It is intensive distinctness, which makes our cognition
very dry, to be sure, but thorough. For if we always stay with the whole and 836
never disturb the depths, then we only swim on the surface and have
superficial cognitions.' Marks serve either as internal or as external
grounds of cognition. A cognition serves an internal use insofar as it helps
us to see the manifold in die object. It serves an external use when one
wants to distinguish the object from others, or to see its agreement with
others. A few marks, which are of little importance for internal use, can
nonetheless suffice quite well for external use. The marks for the sake of
internal use are of greater importance. For if I cognize" the thing from
within, then these marks will certainly suffice for external use, although
this latter does not suffice for internal use.
1. Negative and affirmative concepts.
2. Negative and affirmative marks of concepts.
If the object itself is a lack, then I can only have a negative concept.
E.g., freedom is that the will not stand under die compulsion of men. In
logic, which abstracts from all content, we can only treat negative or
affirmative marks, and die way to make concepts distinct likewise occurs
through affirmation or negations. Through negation I have not extended
the concept and cannot thereby have more distinct insight into die concept. An affirmative concept must be added, and deeper distinctness must
be provided. Through die latter we have insight into cognition, as to its
content, more distinctly and witii greater clarity. A negative mark is not
used to increase our insight, then; radier, it serves only to exclude a
concept from other things, in order to guard against errors. All affirmative
marks serve to ground and to produce a cognition. - The understanding
is actually concerned widi furthering the perfection of cognition. But it is
the understanding's accomplishment if errors do not enter in. Negative
marks are here the conditio sine qua non. For since we are in danger of
getting into falsehood, they must serve to ward off errors, and tiiey are one
of the outstanding means for making our cognition perfect. Negative
"Kenntniße."
"kenne."
291
marks that ward off one of the errors into which no man has fallen have no
837 value. For they are useful only when they ward off a possible error. There
are certain sciences that contain established, negative marks. It would be
desirable if we could erect a wall of negative marks around every science,
without leaving a door open here or there, where error can slip in. Theologians begin to speculate with reason about things that God says in creation, to raise questions about the situation and character of this or that
revealed doctrine, and this is the source of many errors in theology.
Negative marks ward off errors in this way. Ignorance in things is not
harmful. But not only do errors not increase cognition, they hinder it. It
was mentioned above that we are ignorant in many things, that we also
cannot always ask about use; rather, as much as possible, we ought without hesitation to pursue everything worthy of being known. Ignorance is
different from arbitrary ignoring, when one does not take notice of some
circumstances that contribute nothing to the purpose of the thing. What is
outside our end we do not need to know. In conversations and with things,
we ignore, i.e., abstract from some things that are known, but are put
aside because they do not pertain to the end. In the exposition of religion,
then, ignoring requires much prudence. One should ignore the errors of
the common crowd, for if one disturbs the rubble that glows beneath the
ashes, then it blazes up. But what one ignores must not be detrimental to
the principal end. But to occasion errors oneself is true deception[;] that is
\hepeccatumphilosophicum" of the Jesuits, who, if they had a good purpose,
also believed it good to act with bad actions. To ignore is something
completely different than to forget," then, in that it brings the thing with it.
Importance has to do with the relation to use and to the end. A cognition
is important if it is an important ground in use, or serves for several ends.
Importance is always relative, however. E.g. Politics is a matter of great
importance for the minister[;] for someone else it is unimportant. Few
place importance on serious and important things, but rather on secondary things. Some hold it to be unimportant to speak about the most
important objects of religion and morality, and they act honestly on the
basis of mores, or based on an intention/ etc. To inform someone of the
importance of a thing is very hard. I can speak about the importance of the
838 end, of course. But the importance of the means is hard. E.g., to educate a
courtier I can recommend speaking French, being widely read, etc., etc.
But I ignore the importance of the means. Logic, however, abstracts from
the importance of the content and speaks of relative, formal importance. A
cognition is logically important when it is a ground of major consequences.
If a cognition is the ground of many and numerous consequences, this is
philosophical sin.
Reading "vergessen" for "vorstellen."
"aus Sitten, oder aus Vorsatz."
292
fruitfulness of cognition. E.g., what constitutes the cultivation of our senses
is unimportant, yet just as frequently it is useful and fruitful. Virtue is more
than conduiteq and pertains therefore to importance. Cognitions are sufficient for internal use when everything that is pertinent can be understood
from these marks; they are sufficient in external use when they serve, in
comparison, to see how things agree with others or are different[;] no mark
is absolutely sufficient, but rather always sufficient in this or that respect.
E.g., marks are sufficient for praxis^ but not for speculation.
Necessary marks cannot be separated at all from the concept of a thing;
rather, they belong ad esse. Contingent marks are not constituent parts of
the thing but rather are accessoria. E.g., reason is necessary in the case of
man. Learnedness is contingent. - Marks that do not belong to the thing
as constitutiva are extra-essential[;] essential marks are constitutiva of the
thing. Extension ad essentiam corporis pertinens est.' Movement is extraessential and an accessio to the concept of body. Hence we can divide all
praedicata into ad essentiam pertinentia et extraessenüalia.s
The essence is the complexus notarum necessarium interne suffidentium.'ln
logic the talk is of the essence of concepts, not of things. The necessary
marks of a thing are distinguished. Some belong to the thing as consequences" of other marks of the very same thing, aliae notae conceptus alieni
non nisi ut rationes competent.1' E.g., that man has a language is an internal
mark, but it derives from other marks, namely, that he has reason, a
tongue, etc., etc.[;] that he is an animal, however, I cannot judge from
anything else. Ideae conceptus quia sunt rationes, minime derivatae sunt essentiales,21 i.e., those22 that lie in the concept not as consequences but as
ground, those that ad essentiam ut rationata pertinent1" are attributa[',] these
latter must be derived from essential marks[;] essentia ipsa est complexus
essentialium[;]x attributes also belong to the essence, but as consequences, 839
and not as constituent parts of the essence.
Extraessentialia are of two kinds, first interna: modi or contingent characterfs], (2.) external relations/ All relations are contingentf;] internal
marks, on the other hand, can sometimes be essentialia. E.g., learnedness
is extra-essential, but with some it is nonetheless an internal determination^] to be a master or servant, on the other hand, are relations/ For on a
* French: conduct.
' ispertinent to the essence ofbody.
those that pertain to the essence and those that are extra-essential.
complex of necessary marks that are internally sufficient.
" "ut rationata, als Folgen."
other marks of a concept belong only as grounds (omitting "alieni," for which I can find
no suitable meaning).
pertain to the essence as things grounded.
the essence itself is the complex of essential marks.
' "externae relationes äußere Verhältniße."
* "relationes Verhältnißbegriffe."
293I M M A N U E L KANT
desert island one is neither master nor servant[;] all the external marks are
therefore external or internal to things.
We speak of the essence of things according to the concept that we have
of things, according to the logical concept. But we can also ask about the
essence of the thing in and of itself. This is what constitutes the essence
and belongs to it necessarily, even if it is not contained in our concept, in
short, the basis" of a body.
This is the real essence. The other is the logical essence. People complain that the essence of things is unknownto us, namely, the ground of all
that really belongs to things. Nevertheless, we can cognize the logical
essence quite easily. The logical essence means nothing more than the
complex of all marks that first constitute a certain concept. Complexus
omnium notarum conceptum aliquem primitive comtituentium.b Complexus
omnium notarum,c i.e., a concept, which is complete with regard to the
marks which, taken together, constitute the concept. The logical essence
involves the totality of marks, then. They are supposed to be primitive
marks, i.e., ones that belong to the concept not as consequences but as
constituted. E.g., if I want to know the logical essence of bodies, I find
many marks. Among these, a few belong to the essence as consequences,
others are constituent parts, the essentialiad of a concept, which is called
the complexus essentialium.' Extension, impenetrability/ figure are primitive, while divisibility, etc., etc., are attributes. It is possible to give the
logical essence of all things. For we must have concepts of all the things
about which we speak, of course, and these we must explain in order to
find their essentialia and rationataf and that which belongs to the essence
primitive^ and derivative^.
To have insight into the real essence exceeds human understanding.
840 We cannot provide a complete ground for a single thing. This requires a
universal, complete experience, and to obtain all possible experience concerning an object is impossible; we cannot explain any thing in nature a
priori and without any experience, because the understanding cannot
speculate about that with which it is not acquainted. The real essence is
also called the nature. If I distinguish essence and nature, then I distinguish the logical from the real essence. When we abstract the marks of our
concept, we have the logical essence. But if we investigate the innermost
ground of a body, then I will cognize its nature, i.e., its real essence.
The matter of distinct and clear cognitions does not belong to logic.
* "das erste Grundstück."
' The complex ofallmarks that constitute a certain concept primitively.
' The complex ofall marks.
d essential [marks].
' complex ofessential [marks] (reading "essentialium" for"eßentiae").
f Reading "Undurchdringlichkeit" for "Durchdringlichkeit."
f essential things [and] things grounded.
294
Logic is supposed to teach the rules of the understanding for representations that are found in us. We must be conscious of representations, then, in
order to cognize the rules with their combinations. If we are not conscious
of them, however, then we also cannot proceed thus with them. Logic
requires clarity, then, where I am conscious of my representation, but it is
not capable of making obscure representations clear. What concerns logic,
then, is not that we assume obscure representations in the soul, but rather
how clarity is brought to distinctness, and this to exhaustiveness, how many
clear representations are to be made universal and compared, etc. Obscure
concepts are discussed in psychology. Representations are called obscure
in comparison with ones that have* the degree of clarity that is demanded.
When a representation distinguishes the thing from a few but only a few
things, when the matter is adequate for some but not for all comprehension.
There is also a logical obscurity, then, which is distinct from psychological
obscurity, of which one is not at all conscious. Logical distinctness is comparative distinctness, the latter is absolute. E.g., the concept of instinct is an
obscure concept. One knows, of course, that it is a drive to act, but that does
not exhaust everything. - One can have comparative obscurity in a situation. In a situation where it is sufficient for distinction, it is clear[;] in
another situation, where it does not suffice for this, it is obscure. E.g., when
a cognition ascends' in relation to certain subjects, it must be the case that it
transcends the capacity of others. This simplycannot be avoided. One must
be very attentive in this, however. A teacher can speak very distinctly, even if
he knows nothing at all, by accommodating himself to his listeners' power
of comprehension, usurping their terminology,and on account of this he is 841
for them distinctly obscure. One must always speak relatively obscurely
when one wants to ascend to a clarity that is to some extent universal. The
teacher must draw people to him through obscurity, so that they thereby
learn with universal distinctness, [but he must] not lower himself to them
completely. Distinctness is relative in regard to the man[;] it must be accommodated to the speculative understanding and not to the common human
understanding. Our object must be such that we can comprehend concepts
through abstraction. If one cannot do this, then one must let it be and not
complain about obscurity. One must study what is appropriate to our power
of comprehension and not find absolute sciences blameworthy even if
others can go deeper. Concerning total and partial obscurity, it is to be
noted that a cognition cannot be wholly clear, sea obscurae quaedam notae in
conceptu claro universali notae singulares possunt esse obscurae univeralis autem
daraeJ E.g., a flash of light does not illuminate, but many of them make
Reading "den Grad . . . haben" for "nicht den Grad . . . haben," in accordance with
Lehmann's correction (24:1102).
' "conscendirt."
' but certain obscure marks in a clear universal concept can be individually obscure,yet
[be marks] of a universal that is clear.
295
things bright. So too with concepts. A representation that is clear on the
whole but not in respect of the parts is an indistinct representation. E.g.
Blue and yellow make green, but with the green color we are not always
conscious of these parts that lie within it[;] so too with concepts. E.g., the
concept of justice. It is supposed to signify that which is done straight and
without deviation or cunning, but it is not the wayit is with a straight line.
For everyone seeks* his own advantage, without also harming others. In
short, there is much involved in explicating all the manifold in a concept,
and in afterward being able again to develop parts of parts, and we have
numerous concepts that we can cognize only in the whole. It is a part of
philosophy to provide the deep distinctness of the parts ofparts. In the end,
however, we always come to partial concepts that are simple and can only
become clear to us. E.g., reality, mathematical point. When we ourselves
arbitrarily put together a concept, it can be whollydistinct. For because we
have made it ourselves, we also knowwhat we have brought to it and we are
conscious of the partial concepts. If it is given to us, however, then we
cannot always have distinct insight.
Clarity can be understood either subjectively or objectively. Through
objective clarity the object becomes clear[;] it is the logically] greater
perfection, whose first degree is that we are conscious of [the cognition],
842 and whose second degree is clarity in the parts, i.e., distinctness. Cognition grows subjectively through the quantity of logical clarity, when the
representations in the subject excite more attention in relation to the rest
of the cognition and occupy the power of the mind more strongly. When a
representation obscures others in the mind instead of being obscured by
them, this is the clarity that excites a greater alteration of condition in the
mind. We often need to affect our condition through a representation and
to tighten the mind's moving springs. This subjectively greater clarity is
called liveliness. Liveliness of cognition belongs, accordingly, to aesthetic
cognition and to sensibility. Here one must attend to exactly how liveliness
can be brought in where there is obscurity. A certain degree of liveliness
can be used everywhere without detriment to obscurity. E.g., a fitting
expression. Yes, that is good, for without any liveliness no attention would
be excited. - In a sermon distinctness and correct explication must come
first, and then liveliness must also be given to the exposition, in order to
excite attention and to move the soul. This liveliness has its degrees. The
intensive degree is the strength of the cognition. The extensive degree
depends on intuition, not on feeling, where the thing is placed before the
eyes through examples from common life and cases in concreto. The more
we produce marks here in order, through intuition, to.free the thing from
the pure idea, the more we bring about subjective clarity that is greater
extensive^. This is the most necessary thing: that concepts thereby become
* Reading "sucht" for "sieht."
296
more adequate to our understanding and more distinct. For through sensibility the understanding must direct in accordance with ends. - Intensive
liveliness rests on feeling, not on intuition but rather on the strength of the
cognition. Feeling requires that it depict beauties and produce excitement, i.e., movement of the mind. These are astonishment, fear, admiration, etc. Through these we are transposed into a condition most unsuitable for judging. If intuition is already there, feeling can be added. For
then we are already convinced, and we could not easily lose the intuition
due to stupefying feeling. Everything one does must occur from principles. Otherwise it is ambiguous, so that the same excitement leads me to
good actions today, to bad ones tomorrow. Feeling excites tears, but nothing in the world dr;es more quickly than tears. When a judgment has 843
penetrated deep into the soul, sensations can also be taken in, but as
secondary causes and, as it were, as parts. The majesty of religion is too
great, however, for one to play with feelings in the pulpit. They must not
be the nourishment of the soul but only its companion, so that when our
soul is illuminated by cognition, a moderate excitement arises and brightens the soul. But this excitement must not drown out intuition. This is the
excitement that the aesthetic has as to form. In the case of [cognition] that
is concerned with intuition, we must not produce much excitement. For
this excitement affects only the understanding that does not heed this. To
learn exactly how this intuition and sensation must be combined - how,
namely, one can give intuition to all conviction, and yet also allow sensation to be added - one should read Sulzer, and above all his theory of the
fine arts, or his preparatory exercises.23 Let one strive for cognitions' in
history. Rousseau likewise shows much understanding in his writings, but
he lets himself be carried away too much by his enthusiasmf;] nonetheless, he has so much that is well-intentioned and true that it must be left to
each to distinguish this from his enthusiasms. One can also use Hume in
this respect.
The greatest logical perfection as to clarity is distinctness. In Wolffian
logics it is always only the analytic mode of distinctness that is considered.
There is a far more extensive mode, however, namely, the synthetic production of distinctness. Analytic production does not nourish cognition, it
only analyzes cognition that is given to me, so that I learn to distinguish
better what was already contained beforehand in the cognition. It does not
grow as to content, then; instead, I only cognize it with more consciousness. Philosophy, most of all, occupies itself with this modef;] e.g.,
through morals I do not nourish my cognition but only place it in better
light. Socrates said he was the midwife to his listeners, i.e., he made them
reflect better concerning that which they already knew, and become better
conscious of it. If we always knew what we know, namely, in the use of
' "Kenntniße."
297I M M A N U E L KANT
certain words and concepts that are so subtle in application, we would be
astonished at the wealth of our cognitions. E.g., philosophers and jurists
have not yet been able to develop and to explicate the concepts of justice
844 and fairness. But we need only give one of them a case in concrete and he
will quickly say to what extent it is just, and to what extent it is fair. In my
concept of fairness, then, something must lie hidden that is distinct from
that of justice[;] and I make use of this mark, which is clothed in obscurity,
cam.™ One of the greatest skills of the learned man who is not merely
scholastically correct but who also possesses popularity is that when he
speaks with people who cannot bring their concepts to the light of day, he
can draw everything out of them, and he says to them what they think.
The preacher, e.g., thereby satisfies his listeners in the most pleasant way.
When one would like to say, I did not in fact teach thisf.] - Indeed, were
you not properly conscious of everything that you knew?- This act of
making a concept distinct" occurs above all through definitions. But if this
is completed, then it is also necessary to extend one's concept, and then
distinctness grows synthetically, in that new marks are added. Platonic or
Socratic questions are of such a kind that they drag out of the other man's
cognitions what lay within them, in that one brings the other to consciousness of what he actually thought. They are quite distinct, then, from
catechistic questions, where what is asked for is only what lies in
memory. - Definitions have the highest degree of analytic distinctness,
they are the final purpose of all our concepts.
The healthy understanding has the peculiaritythat it anticipates speculations so strongly that we have already advancedmatters a good bit beforewe
begin to speculate about them, e.g., in the concepts of fortune, fairness, etc.
If someone makes an incorrect use of the concepts he had, then we are not
simply to hold the concept to be deceptive" and blameworthy[;] for our
concepts alwayscontain a great deal of reason in them, but when we do not
develop them rightly, then we can sometimes stray from the proper path. To
make a distinct concept is the synthetic method, to make a concept distinct
is the analytic one. When a distinct concept is to be made, one must first
introduce marks[;] e.g., a certain object has impenetrability,heaviness, etc.,
and I will call it a body. I invent for myself a concept, accordingly, e.g., a
republic without punishment, where everyone acts well for his own best
interest. Such a fiction is a distinct concept that I have made myself.
845 Mathematical distinctness is whollysynthetic. The mathematician says that
whatever people may have represented by a circle, I think onlythat it is to be
where a straight line moves around a fixed point. Here I have not made the
concept of a circle distinct, but rather have made a distinct concept. A few
in the case.
"Diese Deutlichmachung des Begriffes."
"chicanisch."
298
say that in the case of distinctness as to logical form, i.e., in the case of
analytic distinctness, the energy of cognition dwindles, and that aesthetic
perfection loses i\spondusp if I always make someone cognize distinctlywhat
he thought confusedly. In the case ofillusion, e.g., in that of beauty, thismay
be true, but when the talk is of truth, the analysis of cognition cannot in this
respect be a hindrance, but instead is helpful. The analysis must not go on
so long, however, that the object itself is finally lost to the eyes of those who
are not conscious of it. For by concerning myself with minutissima, I often
lose the representation of the whole. With analytic cognition I make a given
concept distinct. Synthetic cognition gives me the concept simultaneously
with distinctness. The mathematicus makes concepts with distinctness. The
philosopher makes concepts distinct. Since the former[,] the mathematicianf,] gives the concept, he indicates at the same time all the partial marks
of which it consists. From this it becomes clear that the act of making
objects distinct* occurs synthetically, the act of making concepts distinct'
occurs analytically. In the synthetic [act] I add new marks to the concept of
an object through experience. It arises in such a way that the parts of the
cognition precede the whole cognition. In the analytic [act] the whole
precedes the parts. E.g., I cannot explain virtue synthetically. For I am
supposed to say what we all think under the concept of virtue, not what I
perhaps understand under this concept in accordance with myowncaprice.
To comprehend, i.e., to cognize through concepts, is what the author calls
condpere. This is not very good, however. For we have no expression in
German for comprehendere, i.e., to cognize through intuition. The degrees
of distinctness are[:]
1. The lowest degree is to represent something. When I cognize that
which relates to the object, I represent the object.
2. To cognize, percipere, is to represent something in comparison with
others and to have insight into its identity or diversity from them. To 846
cognize something with consciousness, then. For animals also cognize
their master, but they are not conscious of this.
3. To understand something, intelligere, to cognize something in the
understanding, not merely with consciousness. The understanding is the
faculty of concepts.
To cognize something through concepts, then, is to understand something, condpere.
4. To have insight into something, to cognize something with reason,
not merely to understand, but [to cognize it] in accordance with concepts
that are universal as to their determination. E.g., not merely what a house
is, but also the usefulness, the furnishings, etc., of the house. - How few
p weight, importance.
* "die Deutlichmachung der Objecte."
' "die Deutlichmachung der Begriffe."
299
there are who have insight into something even if they understand it. E.g.,
the manufacturer of gunpowder knows that it has a driving force, that it
has come about in such and such a way. Many attain understanding. This
makes them have certain rules of the understanding. But they do not have
insight, non perspidunt.
5. To comprehend/ to have sufficient insight, insofar as something
serves a certain purpose. To comprehend' absolutely means, if I cognize
from reason, that it is sufficient for all purposes. But we cannot cognize
anything in this way. The mathematicus has insight into the properties of
the thing for many purposes, but not their absolute sufficiency. One can
have this relative^, nonetheless. —This comprehending is something very
tricky. Men must really comprehend what they learn, at least for the
purpose for which it is comprehensible. E.g. In matters of religion, secrets
of nature, morals. For if he does not have insight into these sufficient to
his purpose, he can make no use of them. Hence one must not talk at once
of incomprehensib[ility], even if something cannot possiblybe cognized in
a speculative respect. There is in us a particular use of reason, where it
seems to be sufficient for us to have insight into something once the thing
is there, so that we persuade ourselves that we could also have had insight
into it through reason[;] but if we ask ourselves whether we really could
have cognized this a priori, then it seems as if we could not have. This
includes all experiments - in natural science. [Reason] is quite sufficient
to comprehend what I have determined a priori. E.g., I can comprehend
the eclipse of the moon, because I know the moon's path. But if I did not
know that saltpeter has such a driving force, would I be able to know
beforehand that the powder would explode in this way, even if I could
847 explain the powder ever so well, or could manufacture it? In the end it
becomes plain, if one goes into the matter, that we can only say of few
things that we have insight into them sufficiently. Many can explain the
concept. But most are quite far removed from comprehending. - People
have tried to demonstrate what lies in experience. E.g., the properties of
the lever are demonstrated quite well in mechanics. But these cognitions
always display something faulty, from which it becomes clear that if experience had not given us this, we would never have hit upon it. What I cannot
determine a priori, then, I cannot comprehend or have full insight into.
E.g., the refraction of light rays in water can now be explained, and reason
can make things in experience quite comprehensible, but it is false to
flatter ourselves that we would have been able to have insight into this a
priori.
A concept whose marks are clear is distinct. Marks are subordinate or
coordinate. Subordinate marks constitute a series, and if we progress in
* "Comprehendere, begreiffen."
' Reading "Begreifen" for "Begriff."
300
the series of subordinate marks then this is profunditas, thoroughness.
Here we ask first of all what the immediate mark of body is. Extension.
What is extension? etc., until we finally come to marks that constitute
basic concepts. Profundity is progress in the series of subordinate marks
until we come to their limits. In coordination, or with the aggregate of the
marks of a concept, there is no determinate limit, unless the concept is to
be defined analytically." E.g., virtue is a readiness in lawful actions, a
readiness in actions that is adequate to the idea of the highest good[;]
moreover, it is domination of the inclinations, and so on, and so on.
A distinct concept that contains all the marks which, taken together,
constitute the whole concept, is an exhaustive concept[;] and this perfection, which contains all the marks taken together, is called completudo.
With all cognition, consequently, we demand1' an exhaustiveness, namely,
that all the marks be present that constitute the whole concept. - If a
distinct concept lacks no mark, something may nonetheless have been
neglected with the concept, namely, that there are one or several marks
too many[;] with a cognition, however, in accordance with which my
understanding is to be moved to its proper activity, one wants to have all
the marks, but not too many. It is an unnecessary waste of the understand- 848
ing's attention. This perfection, insofar as the concept does not overflow
with marks, is precision. The author calls only the determinate precise, or,
as it were, cut back. For the sake of precision, mathematics is most
excellent. - The perfection that arises from completudo and precision unified is adequate perfection[;] quando adaequatur objecto," when it contains
neither less nor more than is contained in the object, the cognition is
adequate. Precision in a concept could be called logical elegance. Precision is actually only a negative perfection, in that I take away that which is
excessive in the marks of a concept. Wolff calls a concept adequate insofar
as it has profundity and intensive distinctness, and insofar as it is distinct
through subordinate marks, whose marks are in turn clear. We say, notae
simul sumtae adaequant conceptus," and we mean correct ones. For [the
Wolffians], that is adequate in which marks of marks are clear, although
this is not sufficient because I can make the marks of the marks clear once
again. Here, then, the Wolffian school has a precarious concept. Precision
is a perfection for assessing our cognitions and for becoming certain that
in them there is not too much, not too little. This exactness serves as a
guarantee. For he who says less than he should here will say more than he
should there. The lack of precision rests on tautologies, that I posit a mark
twice, or in various ways. E.g., God is a being that is omnipotent, infinite,
etc. Here omnipotence already lies in the infinite. There are cases where
" Reading "analytisch erklärt werden soll" for "analytisch werden soll."
" Reading "verlangen" for "erlangen."
* when it is made adequate to the object.
* the marks taken together are adequate to the concept.
301I M M A N U E L KANT
precision cannot appropriately be sought, and where it causes indistinctness, although it provides all the more distinctness for a capable mind.
E.g. In the catechism one can say a thing twice. For of two words that
mean the same thing, one is often easier than the other. - The complex of
marks that are exhaustive and precise in a given concept are adequate31 to
the concept. Among experts2 lack of precision is a great mistake. He who
disregards the demands of experts, however, and only wishes to teach the
ignorant, can deviate somewhat from precision. - The author now deals
with the lucid mind. Many can reflect thoroughly on things but cannot
give them lucidity, i.e., popularity. Scholastically correct perfection con-
849 sists in the agreement of cognition with the previously mentioned rules,
namely, that it be adequate to the concept. This is logical or scholastic
perfection, which is determined, namely, by rules of the understanding.
Popular distinctness is aesthetic distinctness, and something becomes
aesthetically distinct through examples, in that it is exhibited through
intuition. The more that I can combine my concepts of abstraction with
representations in concrete, the more popular does my cognition become.
Popularity, then, is when cognition in abstracto is combined with cognition
in concrete, and thus understanding and sensibility are combined with each
other. Scholastic perfection, however, is always the principal thing. There
are authors who are popular, but when logical perfection is lacking, they
are unreliable, although they are attractive. - What is understandable
even to the most common man has the greatest degree of perfection that is
aesthetic. What is clear to the most common man is also clear, certainly, to
the speculative man. This highest degree of popularity must be present in
religion and morals. At the same time, however, logical perfection must
not be neglected in any way. For it is the foundation through which a
cognition exists as a cognition and is suited to be adopted by the understanding. For some purposes only a certain degree of logical perfection is
needed, and the lowest degree of logical perfection is the highest degree
of popularity. The moralist must not neglect the distinctness of concepts,
but he must also have examples at hand and, as a good anthropologist,
must represent human nature and show the agreement of his doctrines
with that nature. - When both these perfections combined canbe comprehended even by the most common understanding, this is the highest
degree of lucidity, which for many men is impossible. Some can know the
rules in abstmäo but do not have the ease of wit and strength of imagination to select the deepest examples to help others see things. Of the
certainty of cognition. There are three degrees of holding-to-be-true.
Holding-to-be-true and truth are distinct subjectively and objectively. If
the holding-to-be-true is subjectively incomplete, it is called persuasion.
* "angemessen, adaequat."
* "Kunstverständigen."
302
But a subjectively complete holding-to-be-true is conviction, the state of
mind where I give approval to a cognition, the holding-to-be-true. This is
the phenomenon of the human soul about which we are engaged in
reasoning here," and not whether the cognition is objectively true.
The 3 degrees of holding-to-be-true are opining, believing, and know- 850
ing.
Opining is not yet conviction, for otherwise it would have to be at least
subjectively sufficient, for me in the condition of mind in which I find
myself. With opining, our judgment is problematic, i.e., I settle nothing;
rather, I only have a degree of holding-to-be-true, although this degree is
not sufficient. Opining has nothing harmful about it, as long as I am
conscious of the insufficiency of my holding-to-be-true.
Opining is a holding-to-be-true based on a ground of cognition that is
neither objectively nor subjectively sufficient. When I hold something to
be true, e.g, that there is a passage through the Arctic Ocean, I am
conscious, nonetheless, that my cognition of the thing is still precarious,
and is insufficient with respect to the object; hence it is an opinion. Where
this [opinion] does not satisfy* me, and I would not like to wager anything
on it, it is also subjectivelyinsufficient. Locke says that man is an animal[;]
the philosopher[,] a man who holds his opinion to be true, opines this.
Opinions make up the greatest part of our cognition. The first thing in a
cognition is always a will/ an obscure foreseeing, which produces a
holding-to-be-true in us. In some sciences opining is not allowed at all.
E.g., in the case of duties one must not opine but instead know. One
cannot risk doing anything on the basis of pure opining.
In speculations, one can perhaps opine something. In metaphysics,
opinions are discussed insofar as they can be brought to the touchstone of
experience. E.g., [opinions] about pure spirits. Here it is shown that
because there would be no end of opinion here, opining is not allowed.
One must not opine about possibilities^] they have to be certain. If one
says how we live after death. Can I opine here? No, I have to know or to
believe. Here nothing can be settled by experience, nor, unfortunately, a
priori. One must not opine, but instead know, that which can be proved a
priori. In general, I must either know or believe what can be settled with
reason. Opining counts for nothing here. - When I sayI opine, I have to
make a claim to knowledge. In opining I always take a step toward knowledge. For there is an insufficient ground, to which complements still must
be added in order to make it perfect. Here I think a complement to the
whole/ If a cognition is of such a kind that knowlege is impossible for it, 851
then opinion is so too. E.g. Based on the needs of my reason I see that
" "worüber hier raissonirt wird."
* "satisfacirt."
' "ein Wille."
d "ein complementum ad totum, ein Ergänzungsstück zum Ganzen."
303
men must be created by a rational being, for men are born of their
parents, etc. But someone must have been the first, who was not born of
any man. This is only a belief. For here there are subjective grounds. Why
do I assume this? Because my reason needs it. No knowledge is possible
here, hence no opinion, either. Thus it is impossible for man to know a
posteriori the continued existence of his soul after death. Here there is
belief, again, namely, that since everything in nature is in accordance with
ends, but man has speculative reason among his needs, through which he
is distinct from other animals, so that he asks about the first cause of
movement, about the sun, etc. Here he cannot with reason trace the first
seeds of life to their final development. For life is too short, and in old age
reason does not have its proper strength, either. There must be another
place, then, where human reason can attain its proper development. Thus
runs the belief.
In the case of belief we judge assertorically, i.e., we declare ourselves
for the truth, although it is only sufficient subjectively for us, and we
cannot convince everyone else of it. I can have a subjective ground for
holding something to be true, and in such a way that this is steadfast, but
is not sufficient for me at every time, but instead is restricted only to the
condition in which I find myself[;] for I can advance to better insight. This
is only relative, then. But there is also a belief in connection with which I
cannot alter my holding-to-be-true at all, which one cannot call theoretical belief[;] instead, this is a practical belief. Hence it is fully as strong as
conviction and as the greatest apodeictic certainty. This practical belief is
moral belief. This is when, based on my moral sentiment, I accept something that is necessarily connected with this, which is regarded as' wholly
unalterable. E.g., I can see, based on the conformity to ends and the order
in the world, that there is a God. Yet some things seem contrary to ends.
For this, such speculative grounds are not sufficient; only morality is. If I
am to make someone convinced of my belief, however, then it is presupposed that he has just such moral sentiments. Theoretical belief is alter-
852 able/to be sure, if it is not supported by moral belief. For I can advance to
better insight, and find something contrary in nature, and then my
holding-to-be-true comes to an end. - It ispermissible to accept propositions of reason on belief only for a single kind [of proposition,] namely, in
mathematics, because here, on account of its evidence, one cannot err
very easily, and one sees the error at once. In philosophical sciences,
however, it is absurd to accept propositions that are maintained without
proof. In history I can also have knowledge, if it is such that it can be
communicated to everyman. E.g., that London lies in England, because
Reading "das als" for "das."
Reading "wandelbar" for "nicht wandelbar."
304
we all have days when mail arrives, and we hear the very same thing from
so many people who agree.
Believing is a subjectively sufficient but objectively insufficient holdingto-be-true. Sense is always subjective. Knowing is an objective holdingto-be-true, with consciousness. He who undertakes something must risk
something in accordance with his opinion. This belief can be a wholly
rational belief, and subjective^ I can have such a sufficient ground for
holding something to be true that I can make my decision about cognition^
accordingly. E.g., sowing, setting out to sea, etc., is grounded on this. One
believes that the grain will come up, that the east wind will blow, and then
the west wind. Nonetheless, we cannot be certain about all these things,
and we have only subjective grounds for holding-to-be-true. Now if I can
hold something to be true on my own account, however, even if it is not
very certain objective^, I can never have a subjective ground for holding-tobe-true in morals; instead, objective truth must always reign in this field.
The judge cannot condemn anyone to death unless he deserved it according to someone's charge and there is no opposition/ That someone has
been found with blood on him is subjectively sufficient for holding-to-betrue, but not objectively. Someone can hold something to be true in
accordance with a quite rational ground, yet also not be able to say, of the
very same thing, that he knows it. - With knowledge,what is important is
not the ground of the holding-to-be-true. For one who believes something may hold it to be true with more tenacity than one who knows it[;]
instead, what is important is the proper mode of holding-to-be-true.
Some hold to practical truths with great zeal even if there is no logical
truth in them. - A bet is a trial through which one tests whether someone
else knows what he believes, and holds it to be true with firm belief.
Someone who will not bet wants to maintain something boldly, without 853
this costing him anything. Often one will only bet a ducat. Two ducats
frighten some people away from the bet. He who wagers life and limb is
fully convinced subjectively. And there are such cases. E.g. He who renounces certain advantages of life, and who lives in a holy waybecause he
knows he will be rewarded, has a strong belief. He who believes so
strongly that he gives his life, for it is as good as the greatest certainty. But
one cannot say that he knows this, but only that he believes it. E.g.,
religious secrets. In mathematics there is no belief. Here there must be
knowledge. For it would be ridiculous if someone said, I believe a triangle
is a figure that consists of 3 sides and 3 enclosed angles. Belief in the truth
is firm only practically, and its ground is only subjective. He attains knowledge through his conviction of the understanding with the most disinterested understanding, whereby he becomes capable of making what he
f "Erkenntnißentschließung."
* "ehe er ihn nach Jemandes Ausspruch verdient hat, und kein Gegentheil ist."
305I M M A N U E L KANT
knows distinct and certain for others, too. In the case of the very firmest
conviction, accordingly, knowledge is not needed. But one knows only
when one can give the very same certainty even to the most disinterested
understanding. In short, we can capture the distinction between belief and
knowledge thus: Opining is a holding-to-be-true that is insufficient both
subjectively and objective^. Believing is a holding-to-be-true that is subjectively sufficient but objectively insufficient. Hence believing is the opposite of opining[;] knowing is a holding-to-be-true that is sufficient both
objectively and subjectively.
When a holding-to-be-true is concerned merely with the subjective,
without looking to the objective, in which case someone else could also be
convinced, then I say that I am persuaded. I cannot give any account of my
subjective grounds for holding-to-be-true[;] they hold only for me and not
for anyone else. When I say that I cannot persuade myself of the thing,
then this holds only for me[;] I see quite well that someone else, who is not
as well acquainted with the thing and cannot distinguish as well, might well
persuade himself. - Every language has marks of sincerity, based on
which an honest man believes at once that the thing is meant thus in the
heart. I cannot express to someone else, however, how truthfulness in tone
and in words affects me, and what moves me to holding-to-be-true[;] I
[merely] say that I am persuaded of it. - When I saythat I am convinced,
this is still a subjective ground, too. For it is concerned only with the
854 subject. But there is also a subjective necessity here, hence a ground must
lie in the object. Otherwise the condition in me could well change. Something lies in my holding-to-be-true that lets me believe[;] I will never
deviate from this[;] I believe I find a ground in the object, even if I cannot
immediately make it distinct. - Who is persuaded most easily? Children.
For their judgments are merely subjective. They believe what they wish.
Their cognition seeks to extend itself, and thus their inexperience makes
them accept what pleases them, and not even inquire into what the understanding requires. People who are predisposed' concerning something can
also be persuaded, however, i.e., an opinion gets a footing in the man, and
other opinions then find the place no longer empty. Men are usuallyquite
predisposed. For the judgments of our youth come first, and later ones
find no place, therefore. For the understanding cannot clear it out again,
since it is hard to arrive at something free from all impressions/ as in law
the prior occupans is always the most fortunate. Predisposition includes
predilection, when one is strongly inclined toward someone by love, when
that which our patrons, friends, etc., have maintained influences our judgments as well, so that we hold these judgments to be objective. When a
man gives approval to such a judgment, he does not know what actually
' "praeoccupirt."
' Reading "frey von allen Eindrücken" for "von allen Eindrücken."
306
determines him, whether understanding, or idea, or sensibility. Now*sensibility together with the understanding can yield a mixed effect. If only we
could always distinguish what sensibility and understanding do, then the
influence of sensibility would not be harmful. But if judgment rests on
predisposition, then these influences are hard to note. In the case of
holding-to-be-true, then, the hardest question is, Whence did it arise? [I]f
sensibility has much effect, the thing is not therefore to be rejected. For
the understanding also has a part in this, and cognizes' enough grounds as
to the object. When our approval has for the most part objective grounds,
however, then we nonetheless have to be distrustful, above all when men
are divided concerning the matter[;] and then we have to investigate which
of the two opinions has subjective grounds. How can one distinguish
conviction and persuasion, then? We distinguish the two even through
feeling. One says, I am persuaded that this did not happen thus[;] insofar
as I can judge from the course of things, I have to declare myself against
this story. I am convinced when the thing is so logically perfect that I can 855
communicate it to someone else[;] when I represent to myself that I would
hold the thing to be true no matter what the risks[;] if I were to waver, then
I would not really be convinced. But if I believe I am not risking anything
when I put up all my interests as security, then I am convinced.
When we opine, this is a cognition that does not even have subjective
grounds, then[;] it is the beginning of holding-to-be-true. Belief already
means a subjectively sufficient holding-to-be-true, which does not seem
to be objectively sufficient but nonetheless has various grounds, which are
determined in the understanding. Belief always presupposes conviction.
For in it there is something firm. When someone says, I believe that could
happen, he only opines, and this is only a confusion of words. For he
would willingly let himself be shown otherwise. The cause of belief, e.g.,
in the case of the hope for another world, is when someone cannot prove
to us the opposite and its impossibility, and one has here a ground in the
understanding. E.g., the unequal distribution of good and evil. The subjective ground, however, which is grounded on morality, cannot be counted
as an objective ground. Belief is firm, then, when it leads a rational man to
neglect the advantages of his life for his belief. He who is moved by duty
and hope combined to renounce all these advantages believes and is
convinced. In regard to its effect on the subject, this holding-to-be-true
will not yield to the highest certainty, and practical conviction is the
strongest possible. This practical conviction can fall on certain propositions, and these are then morally certain propositions. These are the
ground of all morality, and they agree with our greatest conscientiousness,
if we live according to them and thus subordinate our actions to them.
* Reading "nun" for "nur."
' Ak, "er kennt"; MS, "erkennt."
307
Everyone can see that no one will rob him of the belief that the apparent
disharmony between good and evil will come to an end[;] and on this
account I ask, Do I have ground enough to accept it? Yes, a practical
ground, but not a logical one. It fits together so firmly with reason,
however. For the greatest mathematician could not do anything here if I
were not willing to be robbed of the belief even at the cost of my life.
If this conviction does not immediately serve for speculative but only for
practical conviction. E.g., the concept of God is not given for speculative
856 employment, but instead for practical employment. If, then, with certain
propositions that men treat as belonging to a science, one reduces them so
much that one allows them only practical but not theoretical conviction,
then one has not taken anything from them; instead, one has taken from
men the conceit that they can have insight into these propositions on
speculative grounds. Practical grounds thereby appear in a brighter light,
since men are led back to their interest. Sensible certainty is divided into
certainty of the senses and empirical certainty. The senses alone still do
not make experience; rather, experience is the judgment of the understanding concerning the combination of our sensible representations. Sensible certainty, accordingly, is nothing but the certainty of the cognized
connection1" of the senses. - The senses and understanding constitute all
our cognitions." The senses give appearance. The understanding connects it, and this makes experience^] and experience, then, is the
cognized connection or unity of appearances. Men must combine intuitions objective^, then, in order to be able to say anything about them.
There are logicians who talk only about the certainty of the senses,
whether our sensible representations in themselves are true, i.e., whether
they have objects, or whether they are for the most part only a great
illusion," which corresponds to the object. E.g. We dream. We hold this to
be just as true as when we are awake[;] now whether, as to the object, such
representations are real or ideal, whether they are such as they present
themselves to us, or whether they merely give us the way in which the
senses are affected, or whether they are only deceptions of our imagination, this question does not belong to logic but rather to metaphysics,
where the origin of illusion and of truthfulness from the senses is
discussed. - In the end it comes to this, that there is neither truth nor
falsehood in the senses, and that both lie only in the use that our understanding makes of sensible representations. For the senses do not judge at
all, and on this account they do not contain errors, not because they never
judge falsely, but because they do not judge at all. - Here, then, the
question can only be about the certainty of empirical cognition. This is a
" Reading "der erkannten Verknüpfung" for "des erkannten Verhältniß."
" "Kenntniße."
" Reading "Schein" for "Sinn."
308
cognition of objects through the understanding, insofar as they are presented to the understanding. All empirical certainty concerns only the
relation of sensible representations, how certain representations can be
compared with one another. We distinguish this sensible certainty from
rational cognition. This latter can be expressed distinctly in two ways.
1. A cognition of reason/ if its object is a mere object of reason. 857
2. A rational cognition* concerns the form in which I cognize an object through
the senses, be its object empirical or rational.
Some cognitions are merely objects of reason, e.g., morals[;] these are
material rational cognitions. Metaphysics deals with the character of rational cognition as to the object. Logic deals with the second thing,
namely, with the formal. Our cognition can comprehend objects of experience, and our certainty can be either empirical or rational. E.g., the
principle of forcer by means of the lever has empirical certainty, but also
rational certainty. For even if experience taught us nothing about this
force, I would already be able to cognize it through reason. That certain
things are not alike, experience can say. That they necessarily have to be
so, however, reason teaches. It elevates the certainty, then, in that it
presents the cognition as necessary. - Sometimes we can have no rational
certainty. Then we must content ourselves with empirical certainty. This
is so above all in natural science. That cognition of which we can acquire
rational certainty is superior, however. - With things that we would never
have hit upon had we not learned them from experience, certainty of
experience is best. But if we cognize grounds that are necessary, and
through which we could also have foreseen it, then rational certainty takes
precedence. All our cognition is either from concepts or from the construction of concepts. The first is called discursive, the second intuitive,
and hence all our rational certainty [is] discursive or intuitive, too. Rational certainty, insofar as it is intuitive, is mathematical certainty[;] insofar
as it is discursive, it is philosophical certainty. Mathematical certainty
differs from philosophical certainty, then[;] they are both certain, are
cognized through reason, but the one certainty is discursive, the other
intuitive.
Both moral and mathematical propositions are apodeictically certain,
i.e., are combined with the consciousness of necessity, in contrast to
empirical ones, which are only assertoric. Both can convince completely,
accordingly, even if they are distinguished by being discursive and intuitive. Mathematical certainty is thus called evident,5 i.e., so that the 858
objects are not exhibited in abstracto through concepts, but in an individf "Eine Vernunft-Erkenntniß."
' "Eine vernünftigeErkenntniß."
' "der Satz vonder Potenz."
' "evident."
309
ual intuition. If die question is about the degree of certainty, however,
one cannot change philosophical propositions into madiematical ones.
Some come very close to intuition, but still they are different. Wolff
made die mistake of trying to judge discursively in madiematics. E.g.,
die definition of similarity for triangles. The proposition, Do what is
right, need not be constructed. For it is aleady clear. In contrast, one
would not extract die proof that 2+ 2= 4 fr°m anY concept. Hence philosophical and madiematical certainty cannot be mixed up. Our author
speaks now of the modi judidi veritatis et falsitatis,' or of die modi of
holding-to-be-true.
1. A cognition is said to be widely accepted, i.e., if it finds approval with all,
although in itself it is not certain. This is a merely external mark, then, from
which certainly cannot yet be inferred.
2. A cognition is settled, i.e., it is accepted as a universally cognized truth.
3. A cognition is undeniable, indisputable, it is impossible to doubt the proposition's truth.
A proposition is settled in two senses. For one thing, if it is objectively
certain, i.e., indisputable, or also subjectiveL, if one has accepted dial a
cognition is cognized as certain. In natural science there are many settled
propositions, but also a multitude of accepted propositions. Undoubted
propositions are not called setded, namely, because they cannot be disputed any more. E.g., mathematical propositions. Objections can still be
found to many physical problems[;] if cognition of nature is only contingent, one may not maintain apodeictic necessity in his judgment, either.
Cognition is called thorough when it is adequate to die nature of dial
cognition in general.
Thorough cognitions differ according to differences of their nature. A
moral exposition is thorough in a different way tiian a physical one is.
Thoroughness is not a logical perfection, or perfection of certainty, but
only die perfection mat is adequate to die nature of this cognition. Someone can be a very diorough teacher of his parish if he adapts" truths to his
859 listeners' power of comprehension, and this very exposition could be less
diorough for doäores theologiae, if it is to be an essay, where one looks to
those prindpia that have to be put at die basis of a cognition in accordance
with its nature.
Shallow cognitions indicate something different from superficial ones.
Shallowness indicates a lack of depth of cognition, dial one does not go to
die depths1' with his cognition, but instead stays on die shore, and does not
follow up his cognition to its first grounds. Certain cognitions swim like
the modes of judgment of truth and of falsity.
"aptirt."
Reading "die Tiefe" for "die Höhe."
310
debris on the top," but are comprehensible to the common understanding
and adequate to the end[;] these are shallow cognitions. If one wishes to
have a cognition that goes beyond the limits of the common understanding, e.g., if one wishes to be instructed concerning meticulous subtleties,
which reason has to have in metaphysics, this would be superficial if it
were adequate only for the common understanding. If I wanted to teach
him only the first concepts of metaphysics - there is a God, an immortal
soul - then I would give him a shallow cognition, but one adequate to the
end. A cognition is also called superficial when one knows the titles of
books, without oneself understanding anything of the science.
OF APPROVAL AND THE WITHHOLDING
OF APPROVAL
We can see from our expressions, I accept that, I concede that, or I
withhold my approval, that there must be something in our approval that is
arbitrary, where we ourselves have to determine whether we will hold the
cognition to be true or not. We will investigate, therefore, to what extent
our judgment depends on the will here. The understanding cannot subject itself to the will on any other ground except to the extent that it is put
to use. Otherwise its conviction rests on grounds, not on decisions. Now
because the will is a major cause through which certain convictions arise,
the will does have an influence indirecte on this understanding. If we could
convince ourselves immediately of what we wished were so, everyone
would make for himself, through the understanding, the happiest chimeras he can - namely, if these chimeras, which areproduced bythe will, did
not have to give wayto refutation by the understanding. - Certain cogni- 860
tions are such that even if we find nothing mistaken in the moving
grounds, we are nonetheless distrustful with our judgment, on account of
the similarity of this cognition to others in which we have often erred [;]
this is the suspensio judicii* the intention not to let a provisional judgment
become a determining one. There are admittedly grounds here for
holding-to-be-true, which are more certain than the grounds for the
opposite. We can have grounds, but hold them not to be determinate, and
thus we distinguish provisional from determinate judgment. We can divide7 this withheld approval in two. Suspensio judicii indagatoriif is when
one still intends to seek out the grounds for the determinate judgment.
This is actually a postponement of judgment, in order to inquire more
about this in time[;] or [there is] renunciatio judicii," in that we renounce
* "wie die Stoppeln oben."
* suspension of judgment.
" Reading "eintheilen" for "mittheilen."
* Investigative suspension of judgment.
' renunciation of judgment.
311
our judgment and give up all hope of determining anything. Skepticism
renounces all judgments in regard to various things. E.g., whether the
soul is corporeal. The philosopher holds this to be not yet decided, and
suspends his judgment.
To withhold one's approval is a faculty of a practiced power of judgment, and it is not found in beginners or in youths, but only with
increasing age. For our faculty of cognition is so desirous of extending
itself that it tries with the greatest impatience to extend itself as soon as
an opportunity offers itself. In young minds this inclination to accept the
seeming as true is so great that they find it very hard to withhold their
judgment. When they see, however, how one can be misled into making
a judgment that one has to retract, i.e., when they are made more clever
by much experience, then they suspend [judgment] more. - It is a hard
action, even for one who has a strong power of judgment, to maintain
oneself for long in the condition of withholding one's judgment. For
man has an inclination always to accept one of two propositions as true.
[The power of judgment] is almost never so perfect in man that he could
be wholly indifferent, and even if he withholds it, he always has more
inclination toward one side than toward the other. - One often withholds
one's judgment so that one will not subsequently need to retract his
judgment, the more so as one makes a claim to the dignity of a grounded
insight, insofar as one might lose something of his reputation in doing
so. The greater the authors, the more cautious they are in their expressions concerning things that are still controversial, and they expound
861 their propositions problematically, not assertorically[.] This reservation*
is always a reservation' that one might wrongly place trust in his judgments, however well grounded.''-The suspensio judicii is distinct from
when I do not deal with a matter at all, [when] I leave something in
dubio, since my purpose simply does not require decision concerning it.
This is judicium anceps,e and it is childlike, while suspensio judicii, on the
other hand, is manly, and occurs in a man of experience. - Opposed to
judicium anceps is judicium praeceps/ which is still worse. This is something different again from suspending/ When I suspend, I do not have
grounds enough for a determinate judgment. I leave it in dubio, if it is
not at all relevant to my end whether it is true or not true. Provisional
cognitions constitute such a major science that it could be a very useful
chapter for logic if it were not too deep to decide, e.g., how provisional
judgments can be made into determinate ones. This requires the most
* "Zurückhalten."
' "Zurückhaltung."
d "daß man ein Mißtrauen in seine noch so gegründete Urtheile setzt."
' undecided judgment.
f precipitous judgment.
* "das suspendirende."
312
exact cognition* of the objects themselves. Hence logic cannot speak
sufficiently of the nature, value, limits, requisites, and condition[s] of
provisional judgments. That would instead become an organon for philosophy, which we presently do not yet have. - Every man judges provisionally in that which he judges first, e.g., based on a face. The first
appearance, the bearing, the clothing that one has in society, must pass
judgment on him, although that is not sufficient. Provisional judgment,
just because it is first, commonly has such a strong influence on man
that afterward determinate judgments cannot eradicate provisional ones
even through the strongest grounds. We judge of a book provisionally
according to its tide. Provisional judgments can gradually have a greater
approximation to determinate judgments, however. In meditating, provisional judgments must come first. I take this along, and I believe it fits
into the connection. Afterward, with an overview of the whole, the determinate judgments perhaps turn out completely differently. Our understanding notes provisionally something of what it ought first to discover
by itself. We accept the truth, and we have a scent of the key to our
cognition. Our understanding is directed by this, then, in that it gives us
the means to attain the end of cognition.
That which is for us sufficient for approval is determinate. A provisional judgment must not be held to be determinate. In refutation, the
opponent can have made a good provisional judgment. Then one must 862
lead him, through modesty, to the point where he suspends his judgment.
We can always judge, if only we are conscious that it is a provisional
judgment. Praevia judicia, i.e., provisional judgments, are of great importance, since with them one has certain maxims for provisional investigation
of a thing. In all things one must always judge something beforehand. E.g.,
in searching for metal in mines I must already have aprovisional ground for
digging in this particular mine. In meditating we must judge provisionally
where the truth might well lie. The logic thatwould set forth the maxims for
provisional judgments would be of great importance [;] it would actually be a
heuristic^ for new truths, but it is not yet discovered. One judges provisionally when, before one judges determinately, one has certain grounds for
directing his investigation more toward one object than toward another.
Faced with the prospect of objects in which I seek a future cognition, I judge
something, so that afterwards I can undertake experiments concerning this.
Before all discovery investigation must be undertaken. For one finds nothing bypure luck, without investigating, and without guidance. - Assoon as
one meditates about something, one already makes plans, whose execution
is preceded by a certain half-judgment' about the properties that are still to
be discovered. If all this were illustrated by examples of discoverers, of how,
* "Kenntniß."
' "ein gewißes halbirtes Urtheil."
313I M M A N U E L KANT
through provisional judgments, they had arrived at this and that, this would
give guidance for attaining the discovery of more cognitions. The judge in
criminal law could make use of this as a thing of great importance. Provisional judgments are also called anticipationes, where one suspends his
determinate judgment. One has not yet decided on determining judgments. Thus one anticipates these to a certain extent. Epicurus called the
concepts of our understanding, which die understanding presupposes prior
to experience, anticipationesJ Prejudices are quite distinct from these provisional judgments, and are the exact opposite of them. For [in prejudices]
one determines without, or instead of, judging provisionally. - We must
distinguish investigating from reflecting. Many a proposition can be accepted without investigation[,] e.g., [wjhether die whole is greater than its
parts. Although we do not need to investigate*here, it is necessary, nonethe-
863 less, that we reflect, i.e., that we seek out the connection of a cognition with
our power of cognition from which it is supposed to arise. Our faculty of
cognition is manifold, and all its powers are in play. They run through one
another, and each operates in die case of the object that is suited for it[;] and
we always seek for the faculty of cognition that is proper for [an object],
without that being difficult for us. E.g., the proposition that between two
points there can only be one straight line is laid before the understanding
for reflection, and intuition tests whether we can only draw the one line
here. We must always do diis, even with cognitions that do not seem to need
to be investigated. For when a cognition arises from the influence of a
power of cognition diat has no validity in regard to this object, then the
cognition must either be turned away or be suspended. I have to see
whether the senses or the understanding or the imagination is in play here.
For all errors rest on the fact that sensibility influences the understanding.
When one believes that one has this through understanding, and sensibility
has a secret influence in the matter, then errors arise. - It is customarily
said that nothing comes from nothing. We must have a material out of
which we make cognitions. We cannot produce this matter ourselves.
Hence everything must come from experience, and yet nothing is ever
evident unless reason alone has made it.2* If you wish to be convinced
through the understanding alone, whence will youtake it?- The reflection'
mentioned is needed even where investigation seems to be impossible. E.g.,
with mathematical propositions. We accept some judgmentswithout reflection"1 and without attention to the power of cognition that has an influence
on the judgment,and from this prejudicesarise. Prejudiceisthe mechanization of reason in principles. A prejudice is aprincipium for judgingbased on
subjective causes that are regarded as objective. Subjective causes all lie in
' Reading "anticipationes" for"anticipation."
* Reading "untersuchen" for "unterscheiden."
' Reading "Ueberlegung" for "Ueberzeugung."
™ Reading "Ueberlegung" for "Ueberzeugung."
314
sensibility. Objective grounds lie in the understanding. Accordingly[,] because sensibility hasinfluence, the judgment cannot be true. - A prejudice,
accordingly, is aprincipium of judgments, of reason in principles. I cannot
say, e.g., that what this man says of his son is a prejudice - that he himself
has a good mind but that he hasbeen seduced byothers - if the sonhimself
is a bad man[;] instead, the judgment arises from a prejudice. Erroneous 864
judgments based on prejudices are not themselves prejudices [;] hence
actual prejudices are a source of many false judgmentsin the principle" of
these judgments. In the example given, the proposition is taken from a
principium, and has in fact the effect o^ aprincipium. With a prejudice, one
must alwaysreflect on where it comes from. E.g., The apple does not fall far
from the tree[; this] could be called a prejudice, because it is a universal
proposition and hence a.principium. But one could also saythat it has arisen
from earlier prejudices, which children have from their parents. - Allprejudices are prindpia for judging. From them a judgment must arise, then.
Someone has found a proposition such-and-such maintained by Leibniz.
Now he holds [Leibniz] to be thorough, although he does not have any
insight into the proof. This is not a prejudice, but rather inclination based
on a prejudice.The prejudices of well-known merits give strong presumption that everything that is said, e.g., by Wolff, Leibniz, etc., will be
meritorious. - Prejudice is a principium for judging, not from objective
grounds[;] but if all the grounds of the judgment are drawn not from the
object but from the subject, then they are drawn from such sources. Hence
I may only say to myself that it seems to me thus, and not that the object is
so. All grounds must actually be objective, then. Objective grounds are
opposed to subjectiveones. With grounds, I think only of something universal, and with subjective causes a certain condition operates in man. -
Custom easily makes propositions to which we have long adhered become
quite necessary for us, so that we finally make of them a ground for judging^] and in this way one can make prindpia for judgments out of pure
customs. E.g., it is a custom to have a superstitious respect for someone,
namely, because this man has alwaysbeen such in earlier times[;] thus there
arises from this a principle for judging, i.e., an inclination, which has
become our ownthrough frequent exercise. From this it becomes clear how
a principium arises out of subjective causes. - One judges the maxims of
others critically, and holds his own to be good. Here is the prejudice suum
cuique pulchrum," whose subjective cause is self-love. In the manners of
others there is often nothing improper, even iP we hold it to be so.
Here the understanding is just misled and holds these to be objective
grounds, and this then causes us to judge through the admixture of 865
* "im Grundsatz und principium."
to each his own beauty.
p Reading "auch wenn" for "wenn."
315
sensibility. The principal sources of prejudices are subjective causes, accordingly, which are falsely held to be objective grounds. They serve, as it
were, in place of principles, because prejudices must be principles. The
principal sources of prejudices are above all imitation, custom, and inclination.
[The] idea of [prejudice] is a ground for judging based on subjective
causes, and each prejudice holds as a prindpium for judging, i.e., it is of
universal influence. Thus
1. Imitation. The human understanding seeks to extend itself, and in the case of
the ignorance that one finds in children and in the common man, it extends
itself by the example of others, in that it imitates the thought of others.
Imitation is thus a ground for holding to be true something that someone else
has said. E.g., what all men maintain must be true. This includes all proverbs.
2. Custom is the second source of prejudices. It operates most strongly among
the old, just as imitation occurs more among the young than among the old.
Young people have not yet lived long enough to allow custom to become so
important in them. If one is old, however, then he cannot easily take on
another form. Indeed, custom operates among old people so strongly that one
cannot remove them from it, above all if it has arisen, in addition, out of
imitation. Then the man is wholly incurable. For imitation makes allreflection
by oneself impossible. When, e.g., an author wants to expound a new system
of a science, custom makes him have many difficulties in the beginning. For
time must first pass before such a cognition stops the stream of customs and
gradually brings it to a standstill, and then gives it the opposite direction.
Thus prejudices based on custom can only be removed by the passage of time.
3. Inclination or Disinclination. Predilection or inclination is when, before one
investigates a thing, one is already predisposed toward it beforehand.
Imitation is most contrary to the free use of our reason, because here
we accustom ourselves early to making use of the judgments of others
instead of our own. The free use of reason can be divided into the active
866 use and the passive, and judgments of imitation are habitus of a passive
use. I make use of my reason actively when I derive something myself
from the laws of nature. It is harmful to represent certain men to youths as
masters, so that they have to imitate their language or expressions mechanically. For from that comes a passive use of reason, and this is a
contradictio in adjecto. For all reason, as to its nature, is a self-active
prindpium of thought, and even when I take experience as the ground in
thinking, reason nonetheless makes universal rules of experience. The
use of reason consists in self-activity, then, but the laziness of men makes
them prefer to proceed passively, rather than raising their power of cognition so far as to make use of their own powers. Accordingly, they have
merely subjective and historical cognitions, because they merely imitate.
Such a procedure is fruitful soil for rapidlyproliferating prejudices, and it
hinders all improvement and progress in a thing[;] and yet it is so univer-
316
sally widespread, because it is so suited to the human inclination to comfort. There is nothing more harmful, then, than when one accustoms
pupils to imitate authors, or rather to ape them.
Sentences and proverbs are a principle of imitation. Proverbs are expressions taken from common life and from the language of the crowd.
The first source[s] of proverbs are commonly prejudices. E.g. The apple
falls not far from the tree, etc. Sentences are aphorisms that indicate wide
reading, and since they therefore belong to a certain extent to learnedness, they are used by those who want to put on airs and to show their
learnedness. —A formula is a rule whose expression serves as a model for
application. We have them only* to come to the aid of memory therebyf.]
Thus we have formulas in algebra, grammar, law, etc., etc. Even the
greatest learned man makes use of such formulas[;] if in the beginning he
has reflected on the rules, he then makes formulas for himself, in order
later to proceed more easily in application, so that if he knows the formulas, he knows immediately all the actus that he has to observe. They are of
great importance, accordingly, but mere imitation of formulas does not
bring about such good things. - A saying is a proposition whose expression has a certain precision in indicating its sense. When an expression is
pregnant, then, and in this full content a certain precision of expression
nonetheless prevails, so that it seems that one could not provide such a 867
comprehensive exposition in fewer words, that is a saying/ Sayings serve
as laws. Hence passages in the holy scripture5 are called dirtaL.' One
cannot give dictaL from philosophers, then, as did the followers of
Pythagoras, the acusmatici, in saying cmtog e<t>a."
Mechanization in matters of the understanding very much helps the
understanding in some respects, if I have first thought this through myself. But to accept such things without reflection1 is also a fruitful source
of errors. Such mechanization prevails in formulas, i.e., universal propositions clothed in quite precise, determinate words. Of this kind are[:]
1. Proverbs,formulae vulgäres, which hold for the common man's understanding.
To accept these without testing, however, is not advisable.
2. Sentences, aesthetic formalities, prescriptive formulas, in which a rule of conduct is contained. One finds such things in poets, such as Horace.
3. Can ones,formulas of science. We have such things in all the sciences, and they
serve to make it possible to expound the thing more easily.
4. Dicta. Formulas of belief m theological matters, where the words themselves are
held to be holy, and hence are accepted without any modification.
* Reading "Man hat sie nur um . . ." for "Man hat nur . . ."
Reading "ist das ein Spruch" for "ist —das - ein Spruch."
* "der h. Schrift."
sayings.
" he himself said it.
" Reading "Ueberlegung" for "Ueberzeugung."
317
All of these, now, if they have taken root in me without mature reflection, are a root for unspeakable errors.
Sayings must always be derived from someone else, then. - A sentence
is not always a dictum^, but it has a certain similarity in that it recommends
itself by the impressiveness of the thoughts. A sentence is when that which
accords with reason recommends itself with impressive words to the sens
commun. A saying is when something seems to be drawn from the common understanding, but nonetheless expresses something precise with
words appropriate thereto. Bons mots are universal sentences that are
recommended more by wit than by a rich power of judgment. -
A sentence has much to recommend it. For it serves as foundation and
is entertaining for the mind, in that much is thought with little content,
and this little content is suited for the reason of everyone.
868 Canones are rules'" diat look more to the content of the expression. They
are universal propositions that serve as foundations in the sciences. A
canonL can also be expressed by means of sentences, and then it pleases all
the more. Proverbs, mottoes, are the most commonly used expressions in
popular judgments of the understanding and of reason. Something can be
an expression of the healthy understanding and yet not be popular. Then
it is a sentence, but not a proverb. Proverbs contain the current wit of the
people, but expressed in a concise way, so that it differs from customary
figures of speech. They make known the common understanding of the
people, and always have something provincial about them. For they are
commonly expressed in national images. They are canones for the most
common crowd. For they are the rules that took root in the first equipping
[of the mind], and hence they hold universally. Thus we find, too, that
they do not occur among people of refined upbringing. When someone
presents a canonL in the more refined world, however, e.g., from an autor
classicus, then this is readily accepted. Prejudices are severely tested when
one tries to ground wisdom in sentences and proverbs, because one always looks around to see what others have said. From this there always
arises partiality toward the opinions of this or that famous man or philosopher. These were the prejudices of imitation. Custom shows its effect
when one has had a single mode of thought for a long time and now is
supposed to depart from it all at once.
He who wishes to expound something new in religion, metaphysics,
etc., has to struggle with many difficulties. But time makes a proposition
with grounds of proof eventually strike the eye so clearly that people have
to wonder how it was that they were not able to have insight into it before.
The first judgment on a thing that is new always occurs according to the
very prejudices that one wanted to root out from the matter. When one
struggles against a prejudice, it defends itself, as it were. For one cannot
* "Lehrsprüche."
318
immediately be dissuaded from the inclination to a certain verdict, and
then one has to do, not with reason, but with this inclination. For with
reason, things would progress more easily. This lasts until finally the
inclination becomes more universal. Then it is accepted by all. - The
question arises, Is it necessary for a teacher, and advisable, to leave prejudices untouched, or even to encourage them so that they gradually take 869
deeper root in the minds of the listeners[?] [This] amounts to asking if it is
permitted to deceive people for a good purpose. The purpose may be as
good as it will, but the means is still worse than the best purpose one can
have.
One could well leave them untouched, because one can content oneself
with letting an error persist if only one does not strengthen it[;] one would
only draw man from his old custom, and one could not very quickly
accustom him to the new one.1 - It is advisable, nonetheless, to uncover
all errors and prejudices, if one is perfectly convinced of the correctness
of his insight. For subsequently people will see that one is right. One must
investigate men's procedure everywhere, then, and expose for them what
they do based on prejudices. The disadvantage that one suffers initially
from this opposition will be richly repaid. We have a calling, too, not to
hide the universal commandments of reason but instead to promulgate
them, and if we remain silent, then it seems, as it were, as if we did not
hold people to be worthy of knowing this. - Some men do not have need
for insight in certain things[,] e.g., in speculative matters, without which
they can quite well get along with their conscience, and which do not have
the least influence on their actions. If their prejudices are practically
detrimental, however, then expound what you know better than this man
does, and believe that the harm that you can have in the beginning is
smaller than the benefit to the others. Now we come to positive and
negative prejudices. We can take them both at once, however. For with
negative prejudice one quickly understands positive prejudice as well.
They are prejudices of prestige, of trust in the multitude, in the age of a
people. In all these matters prejudices can prevail, i.e., where the senses
run ahead of the understanding. Hence the understanding, which is already prepared for this, shows a propensity in its judgment to have respect
for the learnedness of a man, perhaps, or conversely, to place greater trust
in the common understanding than in learnedness. This matter will be
treated in detail below. These prejudices are grounded on a propensity to
agree with the opinion of others. All the prejudices through which we
imitate others by grounding our prejudice on the prestige of other men
can be called servile prejudices. Yet there is also an egotistical prejudice, 870
where one regards the works of his own spirit with predilection, and finds
the offspring of his understanding to be free of mistake.
Reading "an die neuen gewöhnen" for "gewöhnen."
319I M M A N U E L KANT
Prejudices of the prestige of a person are servile prejudices. - In historical matters, the prestige of other persons is necessary throughout and
constitutes the foundation of our prejudices in many cases. For things that
rest on testimony*' I cannot find out by myself, because my use of my
understanding is not sufficient to determine the truth of history, which
rests on experience. Here I can, without prejudice, build on the reports of
others[;] indeed, in this case it is necessary, for because I cannot attain
them through my own experience, they must come from persons who have
such prestige with us that we believe them. This acceptance of what
someone else says is not grounded on a prejudice, but instead is a condition that is sufficiently valid for our understanding to give him approval.
When cognition has its ground of proof in nothing but reason, however,
but does not take it from experience, then the testimony of others cannot
be a ground of conductf;] and this very judgment, which runs ahead of our
understanding and produces a propensity in us to hold something to be
true without any testing, is the prejudice of prestigef;] if, e.g., I would like
to believe in the immortality of the soul because Plato said this. Insofar as
it rests on reason, truth holds anonymously, i.e., one must not ask who
said this, but what he said. It does not matter here to what family the
cognition belongs, and whether he who said it was of great merit; instead,
it matters what he said. - People complain about the fact that matters of
state and religion have produced so many anonymous writings, through
which people grind their axes over the matter. Of course if the man is
himself malicious, it is all the worse if he acts anonymouslyf;] but as for
what concerns the thing itself, this must hold anonymously, the man may
conduct himself as badly, or as well, as he will. If a noble and honest man
says something bad, it is no less bad because he is honest. - The respect
of a nation for a certain man is on this account harmful, because it leads
men to the laziness of not establishing things themselves in their cognition, but rather letting others rule over those things. Concerning this,
871 Locke says that the prestige of great men fosters disputes, often ad
verecundiam* when people try to make others be quiet because a great man
has said it. This inclination toward the prestige of great men arises from
the custom of imitating that which is prescribed to us as certain, and out
of a lack of insight, in that we always seek for an authority on whom we
can rely, and who, as it were, has understanding for us, and to whom we
can always appeal. - Thus the prejudice of the prestige of the person
causes something special in our inclinations, because it serves to flatter
our vanity indirecte. For as the subjects of a mighty despot are proud, even
if they live in the lowest conditions, namely, because they are all nothing in
comparison to him, and the one can become as great tomorrow as the
y Reading "auf Zeugnißen" for "auf zwey Zeugnißen."
* [through arguments] directed to modesty (i.e., ones based on authority).
320
other is today, so too, if a man is raised to the level of a great learned man,
this often happens only so that he who prizes him will be held to be the
equal of all other learned men. For because, in accordance with this
elevated praise, all others are nothing in comparison with the great man,
the small difference among the others is negligible. It is envy toward other
men, then, that leads one to make a single man great. We no longer envy
the person who is prized, but we also do not allow others to try to make
themselves equal to him. - Citations of learned and famous men cannot
be regarded as grounds of proof. For the real question is alwayshow much
of a ground the claim has in reason, and not whosaid it. Regardless of this,
however, the inclination toward citations of other authors carries a certain
weight with it to strengthen our approval toward a thing[;] consequently it
is an external criteriumL of truth, i.e., the agreement of the universal
human understanding is a ground for the supposition that I will have
judged correctly. It is a kind of testing of judgment" on more than one
understanding. But in metaphysics, e.g., it often happens that men all
have the same deception. There is a science that has the property that it
simply cannot dispense with citations, namely, law. Here we see how
uncertain all juridical judgments must be. An original justice could actually be introduced, however, without citation. Now just observe from
experience the disadvantage of this or that law. For the multitude of cases
that can occasion the direction of the will each time can never be completely determinately expressed in a law. One must take help from other 872
eyes, then, because no one is so acute that he can investigate every case
exactly. If you have paid attention to the varied results of legal processes,
then you will be in a better position to be able to decide. - Citations
always have something pleasant, namely, where whole passages are
brought in from other authors. It is indisputably the entertaining thing,
which occasions their pleasing us. Regardless of this, they must not serve
as grounds of proof, because this is only an external criteriumL of truth.
Prejudice based on the prestige of the multitude is a prejudice either of
the healthy understanding or of learned men, toward which principally the
crowd has an inclination, since with the crowd the judgment of the multitude holds good. The crowd is not in a position to estimate the worth of an
individual person, hence it holds to the multitude, but NB, not to just any
multitude. - Proverbs already constitute aprejudiceaccepted bythe multitude, since one presupposes that what all men say must of course be true.
This is only a historical judgment, however. But in matters of religion,
because the crowd does not trust itself to judge of such things, it trusts to
learned men who hold for us as models, as it were, in religion. This holds
true with all written religions. Here everyone believes his learned men, his
missionaries, who study these books and give information about such reli-
" "eine Art der Experience des Unheiles."
321
gions, so that it is difficult, just on this account, to make converts here. Here
the prejudice is grounded on a multitude of persons, then. In this connection it is to be observed, however, that what I accept out of prejudice can
also, accidentally, be true. It is false and logically objectionable for me to
accept it as a prejudice, however. Hence the cognition is not blameworthy
as if it were false, but because I have accepted it out of prejudice. In regard
to cognitions, prejudices of the great man prevail for the learned world. But
even the learned man has, in turn, a prejudice for the common condition. It
is easy to find that the great crowd always has a favorable prejudice for the
learned man, and they have good grounds for diis, too. For [learned men]
have to investigate cognition and make it their principal business, but [the
crowd] comes upon such things only occasionally. - Among learned men
there is a prejudice for the common understanding, and a distrust of the
learned understanding. This arises in the learned man who desires knowledge, when he sees that allhis efforts willnot satisfy him. He believes he has
873 not taken the right path, and on this account he returns to the common
understanding, because here he believeshe finds the proper keyto a cognition that is obscure to him. This happens when he has virtuallyrun through
the circle of the sciences, and above all in those sciences that he cannot
make sensible without concepts, e.g., metaphysics, law. In natural science
he does not at all have a more favorable prejudice for the common understanding than for the learned understanding, because he sees that one can
accomplish more here through experiments. But as for what concerns
judgments about die existence of a highest being, or the nature of our soul,
when the learned man has there used up allhis art and still gets no satisfaction, and when he finds so much mat is customary in himself and other
learned men, then he believes that the key lies somewhere, and he seeks it
in the common understanding. But this belief is very deceptive. For how
will these unpracticed eyes accomplish more than if they were cultivated?
And how can concepts of another world be brought to concepts? Although
there are certain cognitions that can be exhibited in concreto. E.g., all moral
questions can be given in concreto. Here the common use of the understanding judges more correctly than the speculative use of the understanding,
because it has the matters before it in experience. Here, then, in the speculative use of the understanding one must often call on the common understanding for help on account of the particular propositions that arise in the
end from the purely speculative ones. There are certain sciences, then,
where speculative reason alone, without the assent*of the common understanding, is not assured, and where a certain provisional opinion of the
speculative understanding must probably lead the assurance of the common understanding astray. E.g., the proposition of the jurists, damnum
b Reading "Beistimmung" for "Bestimmung."
322
patiturdominus,c investigated by the common understanding, is most highly
unfair. Hence the learned man cannot take refuge in the common understanding in such cases. But this is not a prejudice among the learned, then,
but rather only a method of putting its speculation to the test. For there are
so many cases in the practical sciences, all of which one cannot possibly
survey in speculation[;] hence one must also take cases in concreto.
Opposed to the prejudices of prestige is logical egoism, i.e., the prejudice in accordance with which we hold the agreement of our understanding with the reason of others to be unnecessary'' as a criteriumL of wisdom.
There are sciences in which we actually often have to rely on our own 874
reason, and without needing this external criteriumL, [yet] without committing the mistake of egoism. E.g. In mathematics the evidence is so great
that no one can resist it, if only he follows the proofs set forth. Otherwise,
though, this historical criteriumL of the agreement of others cannot be
completely dispensed with. For although it is not a sole criteriumL, it is a
joint £riteriumL. For in discursive cognitions of reason, where we present
everything through concepts, one can never hold the agreement of others
to be dispensable, the cause being that mistakes that are not possible in an
intuitive representation are so easy here. The mistake that I committed
arose out of an illusion, which arose from the condition of how I cognized
the cognition[;] hence I cannot hold the judgment of others to be dispensable. For they can correct my judgment, e.g., when I see something in the
distance I say that it is a horse, the other that it is a tree. Perhaps I have
only deeply imprinted the thought of a horse beforehand, and it is only
through this illusion that I believe that I see a horse in the distance.
Egoism, accordingly, is the mistake where one believes that when the
question is about the criteriumL of truth, one does not need others to pass
judgment.
Logical egoism is either indifference1 toward the judgments of others, in
that I hold the judgments of others to be unnecessary for passing judgment on my own judgment, or it is conceit and arrogance, where one allots
it to himself alone to make a correct judgment about a thing for all others.
Providence has directed, however, that we expound our judgments to
universal reason, and has placed in us the drive to do this. Many believe
that this is nothing more than the motive of vanity. That could be, but the
purpose of providence is nonetheless achieved, and we actually do exert
ourselves better, too. If it does not happen that we lay our thoughts before
universal human reason, then we have cause to call into question the
validity of our judgments, because we do not wish to follow nature's wise
precept that we test our truth on the judgments of others. It is wrong,
' themaster suffers the punishment.
Reading "unnöthig" for "unmöglich."
"Indifferentism oder Gleichgültigkeit."
323I M M A N U E L KANT
accordingly, for the state to forbid men to write books and to judge, e.g.,
about matters of religion. For then they are deprived of the only means
that nature has given them, namely, testing their judgment on the reason
of others. The freedom to diink in silence is given by the people who
875 tyrannize so despotically. But that is only because-^ they cannot prevent^
anyone from doing it. I can always think what I will. But as for what
concerns logical egoism, it has to be conceded that since human nature
depends on using this external criteriumL, I also have a right to expound
my thoughts publicly. The prejudice of antiquity is one of the most detrimental prejudices. It is quite natural that an old man has it most of all. For
since he can no longer shape himself into a new form, he defends the old
as much as he can, and he defends himself, as it were, in what he possesses. Young people are more for die new, because they are still brave
enough to acquire newcognitions. - There is also something universal in
this prejudice, however[;] there is a certain opinion that lies at its basis[;]
namely, men believe through and through that everything in the world
becomes worse, and that everything in the world deteriorates. Now this is
to a certain extent true, of course. But our lifetime is far too short to
observe how everything gradually deteriorates. There is one diing in
nature that is wholly unalterable, and that is the species, even if every
individual deteriorates. In such a way people come to imagine diat the
species is gradually degraded, and that men will graduallybecome nothing
but skilled oxen, that the old German honesty may come to an end.
Certainly, however, men were not larger, more virtuous, [and] wiser before than they are now, and a man who has not ruined his body by bad
conduct will still produce just as healthy a son as Adam did. The hereditary factors are the same as before. Hence we are not in a position, in
deviation from this, to find exceptional and remarkable tilings. The prejudice of antiquity rises and falls from time to time. Now it seems to be
climbing high again. Earlier, modernity rose higher. In die case of the
ancient, if one contents oneself with combining historical cognition* of die
ancients widi his otiier cognitions/ then it is useful and good. If we believe
diat we can find wisdom in them, however, then we err badly, and we
would bring down all the sciences if we tried to go back to the learnedness
of another age, and to add to our practiced judgment what the ancients
collected as children. They can quite well form our taste, however.
Prejudices often arise from opposed causes. For accordingly as a mind is
876 disposed, it falls into a prejudice from an opposed cause. The prejudice in
favor of die ancients arises from a detrimental judgment against die old, just
like die prejudice in favor of the learnedness of women, because one has an
^ Reading "deswegen, weil" for "das Schlimmste, daß."
* Reading "verwehren" for "wehren."
* "eine historische Kenntniß."
1 "Kenntnißen."
324
unfavorable prejudice toward the capacity7 of the sex. If one has an unfavorable view of the ancients one can nonetheless form a favorable representation of the ancients, because one confuses admiration with astonishment.
For if one has an unfavorable prejudice concerning a thing, and yet finds
something there that surpasses our expectation, one is astonished. Admiration, however, is the pleasant sensation when we find something very great.
E.g. We are astonished if a child, whom we did not think capable of it, can
speak quite cleverly. But in the end this astonishment can degenerate into
admiration. Astonishment is the condition of the soul in intuiting the new
and the unexpected, admiration [isthat of intuiting] the unexpected good[;]
e.g., if a woman begins to speak like a book, then one is astonished and
believes that sheis smarter than she actually is. - The ancients didnothave
nearly the advantages* in the sciences that we have. We should not suppose,
then, that they had the same cognitions as we. Hence we are astonished
when we see that they thought as we do. This brings about astonishment
toward one of the ancients, because he, in the age in which he lived, said
something so clever, and the astonishment finally degenerates into admiration, since we find more merit in him than he actually has. E.g., when
someone cites a passage from Plato, this would certainly be badly said if a
modern tried to say it thus; but it is a lot, we think, that the man was able to
make out so much even then[;] and in the end we admire the proposition,
and no longer [just] the man. It is from this that the prejudicearises. For it is
unjust that we admire the proposition instead of the man, whom we have
good cause to admire.
The second cause of prejudices in favor of antiquity is that all the -
cognitions' that we have of antiquity are themselves, for us, learnedness.
Although the sciences of the ancients concerning which we now have
reports contain little, or even no learnedness. Even cognition of the language of the ancients is learnedness and always wins respect. Accordingly,
cognition"1 of the accomplishments of the ancients wins respect, and here
it happens again through an illusion that their insights themselves win 877
respect, although only the cognition of the man who knows something
demands respect. A proposition produces a reflected favorable light because" the learned among the ancients also had insight into the proposition. For learnedness deserves favor, even if the proposition contains
nothing useful. For it is always a pleasant thing to hear that Cicero said
that, because it indicates the author's wide reading in the ancients[;] just
by accepting the exposition with favor I accept the proposition with favor,
even if it does not belong to learnedness. Because the proposition is
' Reading "capacitaet" for"capricitaet."
Reading "Vortheile" for "Vorurtheile."
"Kenntniße."
™ "Kenntniß."
" Reading "weil" for "daß."
325
expounded in such a vehiculum, then, and the proposition thereby gets
prestige, because it has come to us from a distant place and time, this
brings about the prejudice for believing that it is said better than in
modern times. We have cause to make favorable judgments about antiquity, without a prejudice needing to lie hidden in this. This ground suffices, however, only for measured respect. But when we have the ground
we often go beyond its restrictions, and bestow upon them unmeasured
respect. Time sifts all things[;] what is famous today is disdained and
rejected tomorrow. But what has not declined over a long time, there we
may suppose that it has an inner worth. The writings of antiquity have
been sifted thus, because only in this way have they been preserved, so
that they differ from other writings. Hence we have cause to judge favorably of these writings. But this is no proof that the writings of antiquity
have an absolute great worth[;] rather, they have a great worth only in
relation to other writings, and if one makes this relative worth into an
absolute one, a prejudice arises from this. If, then, we take the bad and the
good books of the ancients, and from this make a judgment of the general
cognition" of the ancients, how astonishing will this judgment be? If, e.g.,
our descendants were to get in their hands the rubbish heap of books,
where it would be desirable that these did not exist at all, they would
probably not be able to comprehend how, at a time when the true course
of the sun was discovered, such nonsense could also be thought. But if all
the bad books were left out, then they would hold us all to be giants in
judgment. Thus it is with the ancients, too. If we accept the opinion of the
ancients, and trust ourselves to them in such a way that in the process we
878 give up our use of our own understanding, then it is a prejudice that arises
here. Prejudices have the peculiarity that they completely hinder the individual use of the understanding.
Another cause for judging in favor of the ancients is gratitude. We are
their pupils. For one generation is always the teacher of the next. Gratitude seems to demand that we give honor to the ancients, and then we
believe that we must prize excessively those to whom we owe thanks.
Indeed, we also think that we will become the ancients[;] and as we
disdain someone who ridicules an old man, because he will himself become old, we would be subject to disdain if we wished to ridicule the
ancientsf;] and so that the injustice will be righted, esteem for the ancients
is exaggerated. For we hold it to be virtuous to exaggerate our gratitude,
too. For people did do something there that redounds to their honor.
Judgments in favor of the ancients also arises from envy of contemporaries. If a man has always studied the ancients, he has neglected the modern, and hence he admires only the ancients because he understands only
them. Now because he cannot surpass the moderns, he does this: he
° "von der durchgängigen Kenntniß."
326
always praises the ancients. One no longer envies the dead, but those who
are still living are an object of envy. When someone has studied the
ancients industriously, then, he prizes them highly, in order not to give the
moderns precedence over himself. - No knowledge inflates more than
philological knowledge does, or than that which is called polyhistory,
which occurs when one has a kind of universality in regard to cognitions*
of the ancients, although this is not sufficient, but is rather historical. The
literati always find everything in the ancients, and they do not allow that
the moderns have found this. When the magnetic needle was discovered,
a word was immediately discovered in Terence that already indicated this.
Philolaus supposedly already had Copernicus's world system. Philosophy
strikes down all pride and brings about a certain misology toward that
which is science. For it reveals the chasm of our ignorance to such a
degree that we guard ourselves against proceeding further on the path.
But all of philology cannot extend our understanding by one degree;
instead, it only makes us not lose the combination and the cognition* of
the connection of our cognitions' with the ancients.
The prejudice of modernity. The modern itself is never an advantage/
The ancients have provided something as a basis. We hope, however, that 879
the modern will be better. This produces much vanity, as the prejudice of
antiquity produces much pedantry.
The prejudice based on an accepted system does not actually belong to
the universal prejudices. A system is a unity in cognition that can be
derived from aprincipium. In the end we get a certain predilection toward
this principium, in that we judge that everything that appears in the system
deserves great respect, and this makes us often close an eye when mistakes in the system appear. This is actually only a private prejudice of selflove.
The prejudice of distrust in antiquity. All the negative prejudices can be
cognized from the foregoing, for it is easy to cognize that a distrust in
antiquity arises from an excessive love toward myself, etc.
Prejudices are actually not part of logic at all. For logic has to do with
the objective grounds of the understanding, and not with its subjective
grounds. The subjective causes are explanations of the actual appearances, of how it happens that men cultivate themselves, the one in this
way, the other in that way, according to their understanding. This actually
belongs to anthropology. Logic considers only the objective, universal
grounds of reason, without seeing whether the understanding is corrupted
or not. Prejudice is a mere fact.' All explanation of fact belongs to psycholp "Kenntniße."
* "Kenntniß."
"Kenntniße."
* Reading "Vorthcil" for "Vorurtheil."
' "eine bloße Gegebenheit."
327
ogy. We can include it here, however, because it can possibly exist in the
use of logical instruction, and one must pay heed to the causes that can
lead us from the proper use of [logic].
OF PROBABLE COGNITION
Everyone makes the mistake, and so does our author, too, that instead of
saying that the cognition is probable, they talk of the object, insofar as I
hold the object to be probable, although my cognition can be true and
certain. My cognition is probable when those of the cases that determine
the thing are more than those that determine the opposite. If we have this
before our eyes, then we can say that a cognition is probable[;] but the
logic of the probable is not a pure logic. It would be a science that had as
its object objects for which the causes are possible, where we then see how
880 many causes there are for the effect and how many for the opposite. Thus
it can be supposed, based on a ground, that that for which there are more
grounds is probable, although this is not sufficient. All probability is a
fraction, whose denominator is the number of all the possible cases, and
whose numerator contains the number of winning cases. E.g., if someone
is to roll 8 with 2 dice, he has 6 winners2s and 36 possible cases. The
fraction is 6/36, then, of which the opponent has 30 cases and he has 6.
Probability of the object rests on the relation that the grounds of an
occurrence" have to full certainty. One cannot have proper insight into
probability, then, unless one knows what full certainty involves. For since,
for probability, one must have a general measure," and since the measure
for every insufficient ground is the sufficient ground, the measure for
probability is certainty. - Here mathematics can provide a certain measure whereby it compares quantities, because quantities contain nothing
but what is homogeneous. But in philosophy this does not work, because
here the grounds of the possible winning cases are all non-homogeneous.
If I take all possible cases and say that the winning cases must also be
contained in these, then the relation of the grounds of holding-to-be-true
is non-homogeneous. E.g., there is much testimony for an accused, (i.)
The deed was done while he was not at home. He actually was not at
home, either. This is a res facti." (2.) Someone else had seen him at the
time. Here the credibility of the other man is the ground. The grounds in
philosophy are always different as to quality, nonetheless, and they cannot
be enumerated, but only weighed. Often in philosophy the quantity of
probability cannot become very determinate, because the grounds are not
" Reading "welches die Griinde einer Begebenheit" for "welche Gründe eine Begebenheit."
1 "ein großes Maß."
* matter of fact.
328
homogeneous. But in the cognition, what is regarded as probable is not
the cognition but rather the object. The cognition can be true in itself.
As for what concerns the probability of cognition, this is grounds for
holding-to-be-true before any investigation. If I find no contradiction in
the cognition, but rather connection with other things, then I do not say
that the object is true. The probability of cognition does not mean much;
what matters is rather whether the object is true. - Men often think, when
they predict something probable, that they have achieved a real triumph,
even if they had no grounds for holding it to be true, it came by chance
although the judgment was ungroundedf;] hence the cognition was not 881
probable, even if it was cognition of a probable object. We must not always
follow probable cognition. It is only the beginning of the beginning of
testing, and it can lead us to inquire further concerning the truth. A
cognition is doubtful when there are grounds for and against it/ No doubt
can be raised against it, because it maintains the opposite just as well.26
This indifference in logic is just that which is indifferent in the practical,
then, where the understanding is wholly indifferent in regard to the cognition. A cognition is doubted when one has already declared for it, but, on
the other hand, opposing grounds are brought against it. A doubt is a
mere obstacle to holding-to-be-true. It is the condition of the mind when
there is something that hinders us from approving. One can consider it
objectively and subjectively.If the doubt is objectivelydistinct, then it is an
objection. If it is objectively indistinct and obscure, then it is a scruple. In
common speech dubitatio, subjective doubt, and dubium, objective doubt,
are confused with one another. One says, I have many doubts about that[;]
if these are not objective grounds then one could well doubt for himself.
But one cannot expound that to someone else as grounds, in order to
move him to doubt too. The grounds of subjective holding-to-be-true are
to be located in education, in that one cannot quite accustom his mind to
accepting a different opinion yet. - One has a scruple against a cognition
when one cannot take away the obstacle to the holding-to-be-true. This
scruple can also be subjective. It is what frightens us in cognitions, so that
we do not wish to approve the cognition with all our soul, because something in us is opposed to full approval. - Scruples are not to be disdained.
For in the beginning all our cognitions are obscure, and so in the beginning, of course, some things are expounded for us with scruples, since
there are grounds that conflict with the object. If a scruple becomes clear,
then it becomes an objection, and before it is made clear, the scruple must
not be rejected, then. It indicates great talent when one can make his
scruples clear to someone else. Objections presuppose that cognitions are
already taken to be true. Doubts do not presuppose that; instead, we can
always proceed problematically there. - Objections do not yet refute;
* Reading "dieselben" for "dieselbe."
329
rather, they ought only to weaken the cognition. In all holding-to-be-true,
882 they have the value, therefore, that the certainty of the cognition comes to
greater perfection. Hence a thing cannot be attacked any more, because
the opponent has put forth all the grounds for the opposite. Law and
religion need objections, consequently, because they arrive thereby at
greater certainty. Doubts can be provided with an answer. Objections are
refuted. Every doubt must not only be replied to, for then it is only turned
aside, but it must be resolved, in that I must show how it was possible for
it to arise. If this does not happen, then the obstacle to holding-to-be-true
is not yet fully removed, and the ground for new doubts remains. From
this it follows that refutation of objections must take place in a friendly
way, so that instead of merely driving the other back, one must also
inquire by what means an otherwise good understanding could have been
brought to such objections, i.e., through what illusion the objections
arose. If we find confusion, then we must explain this to him and thus
nodum resolvere, non secare.y Probabilitas is probability, verisimilitudo is plausibility. A cognition as cognition can be called a plausibility, but the thing
that I hold to be true or probable is not on that account verisimilis* but
rather probable or improbable. The distinction rests on this. In the case of
probability, I compare the grounds of the holding-to-be-true to certainty.
If the holding-to-be-true is greater than half the sufficient ground, then
the cognition is probable. If it is less than half, then the cognition is
improbable. For if I have more than half the ground, then I have more
grounds than are even possible for the opposite, and these are" necessarily
also more than all the grounds that are possible on the other side. In
mathematics, in the case of probability, one can determine the sufficient
ground of the holding-to-be-true with numbers, because the things are
homogeneous in their grounds of possibility[;] and when things are only of
one kind, then they need only be counted up [to determine] whether my
grounds constitute more than half. But in philosophical cognitions I can
only determine the grounds of truth discursively. For by virtue of the fact
that the grounds here are not homogeneous, it happens that I cannot say
that here is half the sufficient ground. For one cannot indicate how a
ground is related to the sufficient ground, because no equal ratio* can be
883 indicated between non-homogeneous things. Laws and examples from
nature, without the testimony of others, are grounds of this kind. Where
can the half-way point be found here? Hence a logic of probability is an
impossible undertaking. If one understands thereby the part of logic where
the concepts of the probable, the doubtful, etc., are made understandable,
untie the knot, not cut it.
Reading "verisimilis" for "verisimile."
Reading "diese sind" for "diese."
"kein gleiches Verhältniß."
330
then this can properly occur. But if degrees are to be indicated, in order to
pass judgment on whether it is probable or not, then it is impossible,
because in the case of certainty one does not achieve insight into the
grounds for certainty until one has actually attained certainty[;] and since
in philosophy the grounds of holding-to-be-true are non-homogeneous,
we can only weigh them, i.e., try to measure the grounds by our approval.
We cannot measure them, however; instead, the art of measurement of
probability concerns mathematics. - In the usual logics one always has
rules according to which the understanding is to be used in the case of
probability. But the rules are understood even more obscurely than if one
wished to make use of them. They do not help us in use, either; rather,
this requires merely reflection. - Understanding is the faculty of rules.
The power of judgment is the faculty for deciding whether a rule ought to
be used at this place, hence it is the faculty for subsuming under a rule. I
cannot give this faculty mere rules that are set over it. In the investigation
of probability in philosophy, then, where the power of judgment also
reaches, there are no precepts for probability. There is a mathematics of
probability, and this is used, too. E.g., in the schools, in calculation,
instructions are given for the best way of finding out probability, in relation to the mistakes of other methods. E.g., I calculate the elevation of a
star 20 times. One time I get 10 degrees, 13 minutest;] the other time I get
13 degrees, 11 minutes. I figure all this total together and divide it by 20,
and then I have the probable elevation. Thus mathematics determines
certain rules, in accordance with which the object can be cognized probably. In philosophy, however, this is impossible. You can give examples, of
course, in order to exercise your faculty of judgment. But you will never
be able to give rules as to how far something is probable or not. Probability
is concerned with things. Plausibility is concerned with whether, in the
cognition, there are more grounds for the thing than against it. For if I
compare the grounds for holding-to-be-true with the sufficient ground 884
and have no grounds for the opposite, then plausibility emerges. E.g.
Someone alleges that the thinkingbeing, the soul[,] will not come to an end
even in death, because in life it did not depend on the body, and I would
object, perhaps, the contingency of reproduction^] then I ask, Is this
probable? The objection amounts to nothing, consequently the cognition
is plausible. In the case of a ground for holding something to be true,
when no ground for the opposite is present, the cognition is plausible. If I
know a ground that says the very opposite, however,then it is doubtful. If I
compare the thing with the sufficient ground of truth, however, then it is
probable. For all probability consists in the approximation of holding-tobe-true to certainty. Objective doubts are the ground that makes a cognition false. Subjective doubt is the condition of the mind where we have
just as many grounds for as against the things. Man is in doubt[,] subjective^] he has doubts[,] objective. Principles of doubt are (i.) the principle
331I M M A N U E L KANT
of maintaining/ The maxim, All cognition is to be treated with the purpose of thereby maintaining something, is called the dogmatic principle. A
dogmatic cognition is one through which all the things that are opined are
maintained. The maxim to treat a cognition with the purpose of gaining
insight into how to attain full uncertainty and the impossibility of certainty
is (2.) the skeptical maxim[; this is] the mode of philosophizing where one
renounces all affirmative cognition and regards all the grounds of his
judgment in such a way that one opposes them with equallystrong opposing grounds. We treat something dogmaticallywhen we decide the matter
with full certainty, we treat it skeptically when we seek to show complete
uncertainty. Both, taken universally, are mistaken. For some cognitions
are impossible, although dogmatism seeks to make them certain. E.g.,
concerning the change of weather. From the view of the universal character of things one cannot settle dogmatically whether there is a simple
being. Here we must often take another path in order to settle something.
Proceeding skeptically nullifies all our effort, and it is an anti-logical
principle, an [antilogical] attempt to drive off ignorance. For if I bring
cognition to the point that it finally nullifies itself, then it is as if we were to
regard all men's cognitions as nothing. Regardless of the fact that skepti-
885 cism is so harmful, this does not hinder philosophical method from being
good for treating something that is uncertain, in that I endeavor to push
the uncertainty to the highest degree, in the hope that through this procedure I will finally discover traces of the truth. This is the suspension of
judgment in order to attain certainty. This method, then, where we do not
merely doubt everything, but also investigate the cause of the conflict of
the understanding with the understanding itself, in order thereby to illuminate the truth, is the critical method. We have, accordingly, a dogmatic, a
skeptical, anda critical method. -
To proceed dogmatically with all cognitions, i.e., to hope for decided
certainty without taking into consideration the grounds of the opposite,
produces an insufficient illusion. For if I believe that nothing more can be
sought out against the truth, then I stop investigating at once. But then the
matter also has little foundation. One can well investigate^ something dogmatically, but not proceed dogmatically. With the dogmatic method one
must also proceed skeptically, i.e., when I test whether I cannot say something in the matter on the side of an opponent. Skepticism, then, is where
something is maintained dogmatically on both sides. One can do this by
oneself, but then which of the two can decide better?Now comes the critical
method, i.e., I investigate the sources of the dogmatic and the skeptical
methods, and then I begin to see on which grounds a claim rests and on
which grounds its opposite rests. Critical method is thus the intermediate
' "der Grundsatz desBehauptens."
d Reading "untersuchen" for "versuchen."
332
method' through which a cognition can attain certainty. It guards against
the dogmatic method because it opposes dogmatism with skepticism[;] and
since it has thereby weighed the grounds of both, it alone can decide how
many grounds I have for holding-to-be-true. Skepticism is a dismissal ofall
instruction of reason, and it contradicts itself. It treats everything as illusion, and nonetheless it distinguishes illusion from truth, because it warns
us not to accept anything as truth[;] thus it must have a mark bywhich it can
cognize truth, and since it indicates the ground for why one should doubt
everything, the opposite must of course also be possible. It can be refuted by
itself, then. The doubters of ancient times were remarkable. Pyrrho is the
first doubter. He lived at the time of Socrates, and he doubted all things,
which he expressed thus: non liquetJ This is Pyrrhonic doubt. But aca- 886
demic doubt is also remarkable. For after Plato's death Speusippus continued his school, [and] after him Arcesilaus[;] Carneades [led] the third
school. Plato had Socrates' method in his dialogues, but he was not a
skeptic at all; instead, he did that only in order, by long suspension [of
judgment], finally to bring the truth to light/ Speusippus remained true to
him and taught as dogmatically as Plato. But Arcesilaus set up a skeptical
school. This is academic skepticism. He said that everythingis so uncertain
that it is even uncertain whether this is uncertain[;] this was called a real
purgative of reason, so that by seeking to purge reason, he also got rid of
reason itself. The third school of Carneades consisted of disgusting sophists and dialecticians[;] what they maintained today, they denied tomorrow.
A hypothesis, the author defines, is an opinion, and an opinion of philosophers, since they explain the world from the appearances. But he still does
not explain opinion sufficiently.
The distinction between opinion and hypothesis is this. An opinion is
an incomplete holding-to-be-true based on insufficient grounds, from
which I derive nothing. A hypothesis, however, means judgment about
truth based on grounds that are sufficient. When something is accepted as
a ground from which I can have insight into the sufficient ground of given
consequences, then this is a hypothesis. Accordingly,it is the holding-tobe-true of a presupposition, not of a cognition insofar as it itself is derived
from grounds, but instead because it is mediately certain. Experience and
axioms are immediate, certain propositions. An axiom is when I accept a
cognition as certain because it can be cognized a priori based on the
nature of the thing. Cognitions of experience are shown based on sense.
One cognition is deduced from another mediately, or it is held to be true
based on a ground, and this is a hypothesis. When I hold a cognition to be
true because it is a good ground for other grounds, then it is a hypothesis.
' "die Zwischenmethode."
f it is not clear.
* "die Wahrheit zu eruiren."
333
I assume something, and then I see what other kinds of cognitions* can be
derived from this. I assume it, then, not on account of the ground from
which it is derived; rather, I hold it to be true on account of the consequences' that can be derived from it. It is somewhat turned around/ then,
in comparison with other cognitions. The holding-to-be-true is grounded
887 on this. I assume the cognition arbitrarily as a ground, but by assuming it I
can indicate the grounds of other cognitions that are certainly true, and
insofar as it is connected with truth, accordingly, it is called a hypothesis.
All holding-to-be-true of a hypothesis is grounded on the fact that
through it as a ground other cognitions are to be explained as consequences. I actually infer, then, from the truth of the consequences to the
ground, and thus I infer the truth of the cognition from the consequences.
E.g., I say that there is a central fire in the earth, because fire-spewing
mountains, earthquakes, and other phenomena prove that. Inferring from
the consequences to the ground is also a criteriumL of truthf,] p. 88[,]2'
namely, if true consequences are derived from [a cognition], then I infer
its truth. Although it is a partial criteriumL of truth, it is not nearly sufficientf;] instead, the cognition is true only if all die consequences of the
cognition are true. But since we cannot possibly derive all the consequences from the cognition, this path aposteriori actually yields an uncertain inference that the ground is the true ground. From a false ground
some true consequences can be drawn, because there is truth in it in part.
A hypothesis always remains a hypothesis, then, i.e., it does not become a
complete certainty. For I cognize only the sufficiency of the cognition for
some consequences, and only the sufficiency of the cognition for all possible consequences would produce apodeictic certainty. The derivation of
many consequences still does not affect the certainty of a cognition at all.
For the very same cognition can be drawn from other grounds. It does
make a ground of probability, then, but not of certainty. Some sciences do
not tolerate any hypotheses. E.g., mathematics. In natural science, however, they are indispensable. When, however, as many consequences as we
can ever find can all be derived from an assumed ground, then die hypothesis always grows in probability, so much so, in fact, that although it
can never be apodeictically certain, an analogue to certainty comes about,
i.e., one yields to the hypothesis as to full certainty. E.g., in the case of the
Copernican system, no one has hit upon a single observation that cannot
be derived from it. Here, then, there is an analogue to certainty. It is not
apodeictically certain, however. It is quite possible that the creator made a
different arrangement of the planets, as the hypothesis of Tycho de Brahe
shows.28 Our conviction, however, is grounded on die fact that however
"Kenntniße."
Reading "Folgen" for "Gründe."
"etwas umgekehrtes."
334
many consequences are found, they can all be derived from Copernicus's
system. We approximate to apodeictic certainty, accordingly, and it is
combined with this comparative^.
A hypothesis is not a cognition that is completely held to be true, but
something in the cognition must be fully certain, namely,
1. the possibility of a presupposition must be fully certain[;] if an assumed ground is possible, the thing nevertheless remains uncertain. For
there can also be another ground with which the cognition fits. But the
possibility in the hypothesis must be fully certain. E.g., I would like to
assume the commercium pneumaticum,k i.e., the power through which man
can affect other minds. This hypothesis may not be assumed at all; rather,
it is a pure fabrication.For the possibility of this presupposition is not even
certain yet. If we have no cognition' of the possibility of certain powers,
then we must not ground anything on them as hypotheses. The use of
hypotheses need only approximate to certainty, but their possibility must
be certain.
2. The consequentia must be fully certain, i.e., if I hold something to be
certain, then the consequences that I infer from it must be fully certain.
Otherwise it will be held to be a pure chimera. - E.g., if, in a burglary, one
wants to identify the perpetrators, one makes a hypothesis, and then it
must
1. be possible that these people were able to do it. If that is so, then
2. the action"1 of those who stole must be comprehended completely,
i.e., it must follow certainly that they were able to do it.
3. The hypothesis requires unity. Not more than one presupposition is
needed in order to explain a multiplicity of consequences. As soon as we
make manypresuppositions, all the hypotheses lose some of their probability. In the case of unity, I infer that because many consequences fit with
one ground, it is all the more probable that the true ground is true and is
the right one. When, however, some consequences can be derived from
the hypothesis, but not many, and new hypotheses must constantly be
made in order to support it, then there is little probability there. - A
hypothesis subsidiaria, an assisting hypothesis, is when something is assumed in order to come to the aid of a hypothesis that could not be
sustained without a new hypothesis. In this case a hypothesis loses all its
credibility. -
Tycho de Brahe's explanation to explain the fact that the planets stand
still was of this kind. He made cycli, and in order to explain these deviating
cycli he assumed cycli in the cycli, and so on, and so on[;] and here one sees
that it goes on without end. In philosophy, everything that is said by the
intercourse betweenspirits.
"Kenntniß."
"die Vollziehung."
335I M M A N U E L KANT
hypothesis is explained distinctly, and often quite true and correct consequences are derived from hypotheses. Every man who makes experiments
first makes hypotheses, in that he believes that this or that experiment will
have these consequences. If the investigation fails, he need not let his
spirits sink, just as the alchemist always keeps working on the hypothesis
of making gold.
In philosophy, above all in natural science, they cannot be dispensed
with, since that which can occur as the proper cause of things we hold to
be such. In accordance with the analogy of things, we accept one and all
other causes. Thus, e.g., it is a hypothesis that rock crystals form prismatically. There are sciences, however, where no hypotheses at all occur, and
this is so in metaphysics, in fact. E.g., that the soul of man can have an
effect in the world even without the body, in which case it can be granted
that it can appear after death and have effects on the souls of other men. It
is not permitted to add such hypotheses, because I cannot prove the
possibility of such affection. Possibility must always be given through
experience. Similarity to this power must at least be shown, so that I have
some cause for assuming the proposition. Persuasion. One could say that
holding-to-be-true on the basis of grounds of which one does not oneself
know whether they are subjective or objective is persuasion. We are attracted by something and we call this persuasion, because we cannot give
account of our holding-to-be-true, and cannot say whether the cause of
the holding-to-be-true lies in our sense and touches our inclination, or
whether the understanding has gotten it from cognition" of the object. If
this is not the case, then we are conscious that it is pure persuasion.
Persuasion often precedes conviction. This seldom happens, however,
with someone who has insight into much and has learned much in order
890 to attain certainty, because he can quite well distinguish persuasion from
conviction. Furthermore, he who has often been deceived and taught a
lesson is not so easy to persuade. Nonetheless, there are some people who
feed themselves with hope. This is not good, however. For the mind must
be ready for anything. It indicates a shallow mode of thought when a man
lets himself be persuaded so easily, or easily persuades himself of something. This is a major cause of the fact that men find no difficulty in
accepting this or that proposition in religion. They persuade themselves
easily, although they cannot indicate a ground for this. Many a man
cannot do this, but instead he must have something that satisfies him, and
he does not immediately give grounds if he does not know whether those
grounds are subjective or objective. We see quite well, then, that we must
not blame any man because he will not give approval to a thing immediately. For men are quite different in this way. One man can persuade
himself easily, another wishes a hundred times that the thing might be so,
" "Kenntniß."
336THE V I E N N A LOGIC
and yet his understanding will not immediately applaud, namely, because
it demands objective grounds. - There is something on which approval
rests, which is a mixture of inclination and understanding. Now some men
do not seek to analyze this properly, in such a way that they investigate
which of the two produces their approval. - Many men call conviction
what is actually persuasion. Persuasion is not always false. It is just that
this man has the thing based on persuasion, not on conviction. The man
can cognize some grounds concerning the object through the understanding. But many subjective grounds are added in. E.g. From the example of
famous men, who, as one says, were no fools, from the antiquity of the
thing, and other such things. All this is mixed together and produces the
effect called persuasion. Through persuasion one can accept certain
things, but also uncertain" ones. When someone will not accept certain
things, then, this is not a matter of the heart but of the head. E.g., parents
are easily persuaded that their children are innocent, and that they are led
astray by the neighbors' children[;] whence does this inclination arise?
They are merely imagining this, however, if a stranger sees at once that
the boy himself is a ne'er-do-well. The inclination is so important that
they content themselves with subjective and actually half-formed grounds.
Someone else demands suitable grounds and does not allow himself to be
put off so easily. If others will not accept at once what seems to us so clear,
this will make us careful; for our grounds cannot be set forth as the first 891
principles of custom.
Science. A complex of cognition. Is divided into aggregate and system.
An aggregate is a common cognition. A system is a science. A system rests
on the unity of the idea, namely, how the manifold of a cognition is
juxtaposed/ It presupposes the idea of the whole, then, in which the
science is contained. With an aggregate one also intends to get to the
whole by constantly adding parts. With an aggregate the parts precede the
whole, then; with a system, the whole precedes the parts. This distinction
is very important. All of metaphysics is nothing but an aggregate and a
rhapsody, because we have never yet had the idea of the whole, [of] how
far man can go beyond reason, and on what sort of means he builds what
he says. Hence metaphysics is a constant rhapsody. The metaphysician
tracks down everything, based on what he believes, so that everything
stands in combination with the whole. But he still does not have a concept
of the whole, and the whole is unknown to him. -
Sciences are historical sciences or sciences of reason. It is not good that
the author understands by science only a cognition of reason. For a system
can be given for historical things, too, namely, by my setting up an idea, in
accordance with which the manifold in history is to be ordered. Unfortu-
° Reading "ungewiße" for "unwichtige."
f "neben einander gerichtet."
337
nately, however, the historici are commonly rhapsodists. The idea could be
this. Human actions derive from human nature, in order to fulfill completely its determination^] if I take as my idea how human nature has
developed in various ages, and how it has gradually gotten closer to its
determination, i.e., to the completion of all the purposes that are prescribed for humanity on earth, then I bring a system to mind, in accordance with which I can order history. Certainty is either
1. empirical certainty. This rests either on one's own experience or that
of others, when I hold the thing to be certain on account of their testimony.
It is also called historical certainty. It is just as good empiricallyas my own
experience, however. For often I must not trust my observations as much as
those of some other man,of whom I know that he is an attentive man,and
that I am probably overlooking something in the matter.
892 The certainty is all the stronger. For there are some things that I do not
attend to as much as another man does.
2. Certainty of reason is always apodeictic certainty, i.e.,that something
cannot be thus, but must rather necessarily be thus. Empirical certainty is
never apodeictic. Mathematical certainty is intuitively apodeictic, philosophical certainty is discursively apodeictic.
Arbitrary truth. It seems strange that the author speaks of arbitrary
truth. For because I say it, something is not yet true; instead, truth must
lie in the object. It is better for us to say arbitrary propositions, then. These
are propositions where I will that something be so, propositions that
actually rest on my will, then. They are commands of my reason, where
the cognitions depend on the arbitrariness of my cognition. I order, for
example, that the circle shall be divided into 360 parts, that we shall count
with 9 numerals and o. These are arbitrary propositions. For one can also
count with 4 numerals, as Leibniz did.- Proof is divided into acroamatic
proof, which is discursive, and mathematical proof, which is intuitive. The
first is conducted from concepts, the second from the construction of
concepts. We do not speak of empirical proofs here at all. One must not
immediately exult in the certainty of his propositions, then, for no proposition in philosophy can have mathematical certainty. For I cannot exhibit to
anyone, e.g., a whole world in intuition. In every proof there is
1. the proposition that is to be proved
2. the ground of proof, and
3. the consequence of the proof, namely, how the cognition follows from the
ground of proof. The ground of proof is called an argument. Sometimes the
conclusion is also called an argument. In philosophy one must always investigate whether the ground of proof is possible in the case of the cognition.
Such investigations are quite necessary[:] whether a ground of proof
can be accepted here or there, whether a cognition is related to experience, or whether we partake of it through reason. Whether we will attain
338
consequences through the ground of proof is what matters in metaphysics, which examines the consequences themselves. Those cognitions of
logic that are certain without being granted are improvable, says the author.
Otherwise, unprovable also means a thing that requires a proof but has
none. A cognition whose falsehood cannot be proven is unprovably false. 893
An indemonstrable proposition is a proposition that is immediately certain.
What is certain without any ground of proof is immediately certain. No
matter how much is mediately certain in a cognition, one thing is always
immediately certain. Not only will we have* indemonstrable propositions
in all sciences, then, which do not need proof [,] as the author holds, but in
philosophy every proposition is indemonstrable as soon as it is immediately certain. A proof is direct, i.e., positive proof, or it is apagogical, i.e.,
negative. Direct proof shows that the proposition is true, apagogical proof
that the opposite is not true. It merely refutes the opposite. In mathematics [apagogical proof] is quite illuminating, but in philosophy one must
use it very sparingly. For apagogical proof does not do as much as direct
proof. The latter goes back to the sources from which a proposition
derives. Apagogical proof only shows a mistake, however, and that I would
come upon an absurdity if I did not accept the proposition. I have proved
the proposition by this means, but not comprehended it. They are also not
to be adopted in philosophy because I can often refute my opponent, since
we both, on that account, judge falsely. We are both wrong, and if I have
refuted the other, he can just as well refute me apagogice without any
contradiction, and neither can thereby prove his proposition.
Historical belief. Our author relates belief merely to testimony. We distinguish, however, between believing something and believing someone. We can
believe something without someone's having said it to us. We can believe
someone if we have accepted something on someone's testimony. Proofs
from experience can well show that the thing is, but not the absolute
necessity of the thing. For experience gives only something contingent.
Proofs apriori give apodeictic certainty, however, whether they come from
concepts or from the construction of concepts. If I do not cognize an
object from mere concepts, but rather a priori in intuition that corresponds to the concept, then I construct the concept, and this is a demonstration. This proof has evidence in it, i.e., the proof is intuitive. This is
mathematical proof. Philosophical proof is never intuitive but always discursive, i.e., it is always conducted with words. Since philosophical proof
is not cognized in intuition, it cannot be called demonstration, either. Both 894
proofs are apodeictic, but with the difference that the one is in intuition,
the other in pure concepts. Hence we must never use the word demonstration of philosophical proofs.
* Reading "Also werden wir nicht nur . . . die den Beweis nicht nöthig haben" for "Also
werden wir . . . die nicht nur den Beweis nicht nötig haben."
339I M M A N U E L KANT
It is commonplace to speak of demonstrations in the case of apodeictic
proofs that have nothing at all intuitive in them. Demonstration derives
from monstrare, to display, to lay before the eyes. Hence it can actually only
be used of proofs where the object is exhibited in intuition, and where the
truth is cognized not merely discursively but also intuitively. We will put
restrictions on philosophy here, then, and never call its proofs demonstrations, however apodeictic they may be. In mathematics one makes no
progress at all if one tries to prove everything from concepts alone; instead,
they must necessarily be constructed. - The Greeks are the first to have
discovered demonstrations. No people knew what it was to demonstrate
before this emerged among the Greeks. It is said that the Greeks learned
their wisdom from the Egyptians. But the Egyptians are children compared
to the Greeks. They did have various cognitions, but not sciences. The
Greeks first enlightened the human understanding. Many stories are presented in the authors about those who demonstrated this or that proposition/ If they had merely learned them from the Egyptians, then they would
not have needed to demonstrate them anymore at all. The Egyptians had
merely empirical surveyors, who were able to measure well according to
certain rules, without proofs. No people knows what demonstrations are
except those who have learned it from the Greeks. All those who did not
learn it from them hold it to be folderol, and yet demonstrations are the sure
step that extended insight has made into mathematics. Without this, all its
attempts would be deceptive, like all philosophical attempts, in which
human reason often deceives itself. In the case of belief there is often a
distinction to be made between believingsomething and believing someone
else. Believing something relates merely to the cognition and to the ground
of the holding-to-be-true. A cognition can be from reason, and yet the
ground of the holding-to-be-true, although it is logically insufficient, be
fully sufficient practically[;] i.e., although the ground of the holding-to-betrue in this cognition is not fully correct logically[,] before the pure under-
895 standing[,] the cognition can yet be taken to be true practically.This is belief
of reason,1 which is fully distinct from knowledge and means logically
insufficient holding-to-be-true that is, however, practically sufficient, and
in both cases based on grounds. E.g., in mathematics it is said initially that
the diameter is to the periphery as ioo to 314. Only later, in trigonometry, is
this proved. Here the holding-to-be-true is grounded merely on the fact
that famous men have discovered it, then[;] because it is already known
that no error can easily conceal itself in mathematics, one has good
cause to believe firmly that it is true, but he cannot say, I know it. -
Where cognitions rest wholly on reason, to believe something on the
' Reading "über diejenigen, die die demonstration .. . geführt haben" for "die aufdie
demonstration . . . geführt haben."
' "der Vernunft-Glauben.™
340
testimony of others' is a complete misuse of reason, for the testimony of
others must rest only on experience. Because errors that conceal themselves cannot so easily persist in mathematics, however, I can surely rely
on the fact that the diameter is to the periphery as 100 to 314, although I
only believe it and cannot say, I know it. We can also accept certain
propositions of reason on belief. Great mathematicians accept propositions in mathematics, perhaps without having gone through the demonstration. In philosophy one cannot do this, however, because errors so
easily conceal themselves there. Historical belief, where we hold something to be true because we believe someone else, can become certainty. - Belief is thus belief of reason or historical belief. Belief of reason is that which is sufficient based on the ground of reason, not
logically, to be sure, but practically. Historical belief is where I hold
something to be true merely on the testimony of someone else, in any
event without grounds. A belief of reason is one that is just accepted,
although we have no certainty at all about the thing, but it has practical
groundsf;] e.g., that the soul is immortal can move me to better conduct
of my life. This practical ground can never rise to a ground that is called
knowledge. For knowledge means that the holding-to-be-true is sufficient
logically, too. It can be a holding-to-be-true that is so strong, however,
that is just as unshakeable as the greatest certainty. He who wishes to
speculate, however, must have cognitions that are sufficient according to
logical grounds, too.
Historical belief can be actual knowledge. Accordingly, belief based on
testimony must not be distinguished from knowledge, although belief of
reason must always be distinguished from knowledge. We can see that 896
historical belief can also be knowledge if I ask someone, What is the
capital of Spain? and if he would say,/ believe it is Madrid[;] then I would
say, You have to know this, not believe it. If one wanted to say that one
cannot know it unless one has been there oneself, then I can answer, If I
am there myself, I cannot learn it except from what the residents there tell
me, and hence I accept it on the testimony of others. The fact that it is
testimony does not hinder there being certainty in this matter. For we can
just as well accept something on the testimony of others as on our own
experience. For there is just as much that is deceptive in our experience as
in the testimony of others. Our thought in the holding-to-be-true of an
experience is subject to many risks. To be sure, the testimony that we
accept from others is subject to just as many risks as our own experience is
subject to errors. But we can just as well have certainty through the
testimony of others as through our own experience. Believing is thus the
same kind of thing as knowing. If we contradistinguish believing from
knowing, then this is only practically sufficient holding-to-be-true. What
' "Anderen Zeugnißen etwas glauben."
341
we cognize through reason we cannot always know. What we cognize
through historical belief we can know. - What can I interrogate a witness
about? I can hold something to be true when the other man has infallible
reason or his experience tells him to say it. I can hold something to be true
by means of a witness of infallible reason in truths of reason, or on account
of that which he has from his own experiences. Since there are not as
many errors to be found in the case of experience as in that of speculations, it is easier to believe what experience presents than what the other
has cognized from reason, because reason is not as infallible. Mathematics involves infallible reason. Hence as soon as a proposition is maintained
by mathematics it is infallible. - Since the concept of the infallibility of
reason belongs to the highest perfection, we cannot accept any testimony
as infallibly true except divine testimony itself. People object here, But can
a man not testify to divine oracles? Resp. he cannot testify to anything
except through an experience of inspiration that he has had, and in this
897 case it is always possible that the man can err. Here grounds cannot be
believed subjective^, then, but instead all grounds must be examined
exactly. - And thus in the case of testimony by someone else I also believe
much that he presents as his own experience based on the testimony of
third parties." E.g., when someone tells what he has read, then he gives
testimony to his own experience out of a book, Here I rely, then, (i.) on
the statement of someone else, and (2.) on the experience itself that the
third1" party had.
One science, namely, jurisprudence, is of such a kind that although it
rests on reason, one nonetheless makes much use of testimony in it. In
philosophy, it is not a matter of what testimony one produces, but which
grounds[;] and it deserves closer attention that although jus is of such a
kind that it rests on reason, one still accepts the judgment of others also.
The cause is perhaps that because jus rests on laws, and these contain a
great manifoldness of cases, a special determination is needed where
errors are possible, in that one holds to be universal what admits of
exception. Now if one wishes to have a law fully valid and usable, one
believes that others will not very easily have overlooked something. Hence
those learned in law are also called juris periti," although it is a science
of reason. It is a deplorable situation when it happens thus, however. For
even if men are ever so practiced in giving heed to all cases, it is nonetheless possible that they have still overlooked some. - All citations, if they
are to provide grounds of proof, contain historical belief[;] if I did not
intend to hold something to be true on the testimony of someone else, I
would not cite him, i.e., call him as a witness. I can of course tell some-
"Anderer."
"der Andere."
ones experienced in law.
342
thing, e.g., that Plato claimed this and that, and quote the passage, but
then I am not citing Plato. - In regard to science of reason, citation is a
heterogeneum. The two do not fit together. It is a great weakness, consequently, when one sees oneself compelled to add historical belief to the
grounds of reason. - In all empirical cognitions historical belief is indispensable. What we cannot know or experience ourselves, we must cognize
through the experience of others, and historical belief by its nature applies
merely to the experience of others. In matters that concern reason, I
cannot call anyone as a witness; rather, in the case of what others have
experienced, their declaration of their experience, on account of which I
hold the thing to be true, is the testimony that produces historical belief. 898
The credibility of a witness requires[:]
1. The competence of a witness consists in the fact that he was able to
say the truth. This requires
a. that he have sufficient skill to obtain experience. It is not so easy, in all cases,
to obtain experience, and this involves practice. And in experience there is
much deception of the senses. The common man is not a suitable witness. For
he cannot obtain experiences properly. For when he is overcome by fear, he
sees one thing for another and overlooks some things.
b. that he was in circumstances in which he was able to obtain experience. Above
all, the common man cannot do this in all the inner circumstances. E.g., he is
often sleepy, fearful, distracted, etc.
c. that he also has the skill to declare his experiences, so that one can understand his sense well. This is not so easy. Some men tell things quite meticulously. Others can give only a light silhouette of their experience, and cannot
give an account of all its circumstances.
2. The sincerity of the witness, that he wanted to tell the truth. The
common man is too crude to place great value on the truth. A mouth full
of lies, he believes, does no harm, if one has some interest in the matter.
They always report evils in a magnified way, so that everything is exaggerated and becomes shocking. One has to make them attentive by threats
with the oath. Then they begin to hesitate and become quite doubtful. -
The same thing holds for ancient times. Not a single historian among the
ancients restricts himself very meticulously to the truth; rather, they always consider how to write beautifully. They accept all sorts of rumors
without investigatingthem. E.g., Herodotus has many old wives' tales. But
they also do not consider it very important to tell the truth. E.g., Livy
seeks to write in a flowery style, and he has general speeches made that
never were made. - We in our times are more compelled to speak the
truth by circumstances, above all by experimental physics, and by the fact
that one seeks to determine the appearances exactly through observations
and experiments, in order to see into the laws of nature with more certainty. Only at the beginning of the previous saeculum did people begin to
see that it is necessary to tell the truth completely, and then everyone had 899
343I M M A N U E L KANT
to be quite exact in his reports, and if someone deviated from the truth
only a bit in his writings, he was ridiculed and dishonored. On this
account, we usually make use in all cases of more cautious expressions.
E.g., Jurin2« always says to what extent this is true, etc. This exactness in
the reporting of experience later spread from natural science to history.
For people saw that it is necessary not to injure the truth on the least
point. Now we have things that make it easier to learn the truth. Printing
presses, and further, gazettes, show at once where there is a mistake in
one's writing[;] historical fables1 cannot be told anymore, as they were in
Rome. For while earlier it took someone 3 years to get from one country to
another, now, due to the establishment of postal service, news comes from
one place to another in a few days. E.g., all the tales of Apollonius
Tyanaeus and Alexander of Paphlagonia came to Rome, having grown
along the way. In Rome they found approval and were believed, as
Philostratus then wrote of them, too.3° Now, however, due to postal service, the gigantic increase in rumors has been stopped. In ancient times,
however, it was not the case that the truth was determined so exactly.
There are many honest people. But they often did not hold it to be
necessary to be very meticulous, if untruth carried no penalty, or it
brought amusement, or even if they even believe[d] that it was a report of
great value. The latter is the so-called pia fraus,y if this is not a contradiction. - From all this it becomes clear that historical belief carries
with it astonishing credibility, because the witness must have so many
properties in order to speak the truth. - Thus every man has hisown
different interest, on which we cannot always pass judgment. Many a man
seeks merely to embellish a matter in his tale, etc. Since, then, without
such critical grounds we cannot, in passing judgment on testimony, believe a witness, historical belief rests in important cases on such a doubtful
basis that it has to be examined closely. For in how many ways is the
human will disposed? If this belief does not have the required properties,
then, it is better to put it wholly aside, if one cannot figure out why men
speak thus and not otherwise. Nonetheless, certainty can be grounded on
the testimony of other men, as history and geography are grounded
thereon.
900 A hearsay witness testifies to his experience of the testimony of someone else's experience of a thing. An eyewitness testifies to his own experience of the thing. He who relates a report that he read somewhere is a
hearsay witness[;] he who expounds something that he, the listener, could
not cognize from his own experience is a hearsay witness. In the case of
common tales, and tradition or rumors, one cannot determine the witness
himself. The witness is a multitude of persons, where it is believed that
* "Histörchen."
' pious deception.
344
the multitude will have credibility. There is tradition insofar as one man
has conveyed his testimony to another orally. Tradition is a series of
subordinate pieces of testimony, then.
If the concept unbelieving, which also appears in theology, is to mean a
reproof, then it cannot consist in the difficulty of extending belief to
testimony, for this is not a difficulty; rather, as soon as it is a reproof, the
ground has to be moral. The former can redound to his honor if he is
disbelieving or unbelieving. E.g. In the case of a universal rumor, this
cannot redound to his moral detriment. With all tales, it is good and
praiseworthy to be unbelieving, and one must proceed critically here, if
this is possible. Belief can be divided into two, theoretical belief and
practical belief. In the case of theoretical belief, one can be unbelieving. In
the case of moral belief, he is called unbelievingwho has no moral interest
in accepting something as true, while he sees, however, how important
this or that proposition is. Moral belief can be presupposed in every man,
and moral unbelief is consequently quite reproachable. He who rejects
the proof of the existence of God according to mere reason can also be
called unbelieving[;] and he who no longer believes in virtue, if he does
nothing out of a moral interest but everythingout of hypocrisy, can also be
so called. Here man gives up all intention to be virtuous, since he does not
believe in virtue.
Of practical cognition. Here a twofold division is to be noted, whereby we
defend against an ambiguity that can be occasioned by the words. A
cognition is called practical as opposed to theoretical cognition, but also in
contradistinction to speculative cognitions. - When a proposition is a
proposition that commands, an imperativus, and says that something
ought to happen, then it is a practical proposition!;] it says which free
actions would be good for a certain purpose. An imperativus is a proposi- 901
tion, then, that impels to a possible free action, insofar as this would be
good and necessary for a certain purpose. All practical propositions, if
they are opposed to theoretical ones, are imperativi. These are various: in
sciences that are nothing but science or skill one takes certain optional
purposes, in accordance with which one presupposes what ought to happen. E.g., in geometry, when I say, To measure a straight line take .. . ,
etc. [Theoretical propositions, on the other hand, do not sayhow it ought
to happen, but rather how the thing is. E.g. A straight line is the shortest
path, etc. These can be distinguished from practical propositions in an
instant, because practical propositions are always imperativi, and [theoretical propositions] are easily distinguished from propositions that testify to
the properties of action. - Secondly, however, practical propositions are
also opposed to speculative ones. Cognitions can be theoretical and yet be
either practical or speculative. For although they do not saywhat ought to
happen, because they are theoretical, practical propositions can nonetheless be derived from them, and they are to this extent opposed to specula-
345
tive propositions. E.g. That there is a God is a theoretical proposition, but
it ispractical in potentia[;] you must just act as if there is a highest legislator
for your actions. Thus although they are in themselves theoretical, [such]
cognitions are not distinct from other practical cognitions, namely, because they are practical in potentia. —Speculative propositions are all those
from which no rules or impemtivi for our actions flow[;] in natural theology, propositions are merely speculative. E.g., whether God's omnipresence occupies space or consists merely in an influence on his creatures.
This has no influence on our actions and thus is mere speculation. But
whether the divine will is also a holy will, this is a proposition of practical
importance, from which rules for our conduct can be derived. Theoretical
propositions, accordingly, are either speculative or objectively practical
propositions, i.e., ones that are practical in potentia. One could also say
that all cognition is practical or theoretical. Cognition is practical where
imperative propositions2 are expressed, in that they indicate the necessity
of a free action. Theoretical cognitions contain the cognition of an object,
what it is, but the use of the cognition is always a speculative or a practical
902 use. And this distinction is not" a distinction among cognitions, but rather
among uses of cognition. We have many a cognition only for speculative
use, many for practical use and for rules of our conduct. The use of moral
propositions can be a speculative use. Those who engage in reasoning
concerning the principles of virtue make a merely speculative use of them.
The ancient philosophers who philosophized about the highest good
never applied this in practical use. Not all cognitions can be applied to
practical use. - Who can make practical use, e.g., of mathematics or
natural science? We want to apply our cognitions to practical use, however.
For through practical use our cognitions acquire more and more truth,
and the final end of all our cognitions seems to rest on the fact that they
ought to contain a rule about what agrees with our highest ends[;] and if
no consequences for conduct flow from a cognition, then it seems to be
without value. Hence, too, all speculation looks toward the practical,
although one cannot have insight into this right away. He who drew the
first mathematical figure thought, in fact, that a use could sometime be
made of it. Otherwise it would only have been an occupation to while away
the time. But supposing that through mathematics we only wanted to
cultivate our reason, that would be as good as a practical use. For reason
can prescribe rules for our conduct, and this pertains to practical use.
Thus the prestige of our cognition is grounded above all on its practical
use. For we cultivate cognition in the expectation of its practical use. We
can sometimes consider this worth of cognition as a mediate worth, as a
means to other ends, or as an immediate worth, and this is then called
* "die Sätze des imperativi."
" Reading "ist nicht ein" for "ist nicht so wohl als ein."
346
dignity. Nothing in the world has dignity. It is the final end, for the sake of
which the world has this arrangement. Some things in the perfection of
man have a mediate worth, e.g., some of his properties. But one thing has
an immediate worth in man, and that is his dignity. Mathematics has many
uses, [e.g.,] that calendars can be made according to it, or fields measured, etc. This is its mediate use and its market value. But in these
respects it is not to be preferred to many other means, since everything
that is only a means is without worth. Plato already says, however, that this
mediate value is by far not the highest end of mathematics. For the 903
propositions have in themselves their internal excellence, which exceeds
by far all the fields that can be measured. Longinus^' says that that,
disdain for which is sublime, is not sublime. E.g., wealth is not sublime.
For disdain for wealth is sublime. By virtue of the fact that mathematics
determines fields and wealth, then, it is not sublime[;] but it has an
internal worth, and in mathematics there is a splendor, and something that
elevates our reason, and in connection with which we feel our reason in all
its strength. Through the thoroughness of its proofs and its method it has
a sublime worth. Again, however, if we weigh this rightly, then we see that
this is still not genuine dignity, and that what constitutes true dignity is only
that the will is good. For what would be the use of skill if man were to use
it deceitfully? The true worth of the will is its use of this skill. All the
cognitions that contribute to the dignity of man are far from constituting
his highest worth; instead, his worth is in using all his talents well. The
true dignity of man rests on morality, then. What serves to improve our
will, then, is also called practicalf;] and on this account philosophical
morals is also called practical philosophy, because practical matters come
up in this science. - If cognitions are such that nothing practical can be
drawn from them, and that no actions at all flow from them, then such
cognition hasa merely speculative use. -
The whole doctrine of practical use, with which the author deals, simply
does not belong to logic. For nothing belongs to logic except the logical
form of all cognitions, i.e., the form of thought, without regard to the
content. It can only contain propositions that can be demonstrated, then.
Experiences of things, in connection with which empirical principles must
be taken as a basis, do not belong to logic, because they cannot be demonstrated. Practical cognition is distinct from speculative cognition as to content, however. Hence logic canhave to dowith practical cognition. - The
author deals with desires and abhorrence. But in logic one must think as if
one had no will, otherwise* it would become a practical sciencef;] thus we
have the science of thinking, and not of willing. -
He speaks further of living and dead cognitions, dead, i.e., which can 904
move the will because they are practical, and yet do not move it and hence
* Reading "sonst" for "es."
347
are mere speculation. - It immediately strikes the eye, however, that none
of this belongs to logic. He speaks of indifference/ when something is
indifferent/ etc.
OF CONCEPTS
Until now we have spoken of cognition in general, to what extent cognition is distinct or clear, certain or uncertain. We have dealt with the mode
of proofs and of holding-to-be-true, with belief and knowledge, etc. Now
the author takes cognition apart into its elements, which should have
occurred right at the beginning. Logically, all origins' in thought are
divided thus:
1. The cognition is a simple cognition, a concept.
2. The cognitions are combined in A judgment.
3. That judgments are combined and that inferences arise therefrom. The ancients said, Quot sunt operations mentis? Resp. tres. apprehensio simplex, judicium,
et ratiociniumJ Now as for what concerns concepts, we wish to begin with that
which is simplest of all in our cognitions, namely, that the cognition is a
representation/ A representation with consciousness is perceptio. I have a
hallucination and think that I am conscious of it. Insofar as I also pay heed to
the object in such a representation, this is cognition.11 Cognition is of two kinds,
intuition,' concept* Intuitus is a singular representation.11
In perception we do not relate our cognitions to the object. Through
sensation, good feeling, pain - one does not cognize an object. This is
only a mode of representation. But the representation is not distinguished
by a particular object. In general, the relation of representation to the
subject is called sensation, to the object, cognition. Logic occupies itself
merely with cognition, but not with sensation.
A conceptus is a repraesentatio communis, which is common to many
things. He who wished to have a representation of the color red first had
to see the color red. When he compared the color red in the red of
cinnabar, carmoisin¥,' andponceauF, however, he became aware that diere is
something general in the color red, that is contained along with other
905 things in other representations of the color red, and he thought by red that
' "Gleichgültigkeit."
4 "indifferent."
' "Anfänge."
f How many operations of the mind are there? Response. Three. Simpleapprehension,
judgment, and inference.
* "eine Vorstellung ist, repraesentatio."
* "cognitio, Erkenntniß."
' "intuitus, Anschauung."
' "conceptus, Begriff?'
* "eine einzelne Vorstellung, repraesentatio singulam."
' carmine.
348
which was common to many objects, and this was a concept. A concept,
then, is a representation that is common to many things. In the case of
intuitus, I consider individual things. E.g., the sun, the earth. If I think of a
certain genus of planets, however, then this is a repraesentatio communis,
i.e., a conceptus. — Concept differs from intuition by virtue of the fact that
all intuition is singular. He who sees his first tree does not know what it is
that he sees. If he becomes aware that these objects have something
common, then he omits everything they have that is different, and takes
together what they have in common, and thus he has a repraesentatio
communis, i.e., a conceptus. From this it becomes clear that one must not say
conceptus communis, because this would be a tautology, because every
conceptus is also communis. —Every conceptus is empiricus or purus. A
conceptus empiricus is one that is produced through the comparison of
objects of experience. A repraesentatio empirica is one that arises from the
senses. This can become a conceptus, if I take that which is common to
various empirical representations. It is easy to see that in the distinction
between empiricus and purus what matters is the origin of the concept, and
this is already a metaphysical investigation, then. For logic does not ask
where concepts come from, but how they can be formed and ordered in
accordance with the laws of the understanding. It pertains to logic, then,
that a concept exists. It does not pertain to logic whether it is independent
of experience or comes from experience. - There are many conceptus empirici, i.e., we often compare experiences and form from this a repraesentatio communis, and this is then called an empiricus conceptus. - For what is
contradistinguished from a conceptus empiricus is a conceptus purus. A concept that has its origin independent of experience in the mere understanding is purus. E.g., the concept of cause, quantity, quality, etc. Whether
there are such concepts is an investigation that belongs to metaphysics,
because this is cognitio pura. —Our morals has many [conceptus} puri. The
concept of virtue is not met with in experience, and if the world showed
nothing but vice, we would nonetheless have a concept of virtue. —This
[conceptus] purus can either arise from the understanding, and in fact if its
ground is merely in the understanding, its object can still be represented
in concreto. E.g., cause and effect [are concepts] of the understanding. One
can distinguish the things in sense,™ [can] sense what the talk is about in 906
the case of effect, cause, etc., but the concept of causality lies merely in
the understanding. Now the question arises, Can one encounter in experience the objects of this, his concept of the understanding? RespL. Yes. This
happens through examples. An example of causality is: fire destroys
wood. -
Or this conceptus purus is such that its object cannot be given in any
experience. Then it is a concept not of the understanding but of mere
" Reading "im Sinne" for "im Verstande."
349
reason, i.e., one is not to understand the concept from experience; instead,
I gobeyond that to which experience leads me. - A conceptus purus is called
genemliter a notio. A notio is more than a concept, then, for the concept of
possibility, e.g., cannot be exhibited in experience. A notio whose object can
be given in experience is called a notio intellectually. If its object cannot
be given in any experience, it is called a notio rationis, or an ideaL. Thus a
notio, insofar as it cannot be given in any experience and also does not
correspond to any experience, is actually an idea^. The concept of the whole
can be given in experience, est notio intellectualis[;] but if I make another new
concept, e.g., the concept of a world that is the uncreated whole that
contains all things, and in which all the parts stand in combination, one
cannot give this in experience. If the world is eternal, what can comprehend
all its eternity? The concept of the world is a mere idea, then. - The
concept of the part is a conceptus purus intelleäualis, seu notio." But the
concept of a part that is not composite is a notio rationis, ideaL. As long as my
reason represents something divisible, that can always be divided further.
But my reason finally demands the ultimate part, which cannot be further
divided into parts, i.e., is simple. This concept cannot be shown in experience, and thus is a concept apriori,an idea. The concept of God is an idea.
For experience cannot teach us whether all possible perfections may be
united somewhere. - The whole of morals rests on ideas. We cannot encounter virtue among men. But myreason must nonetheless have a concept
of virtue, as it must be in its complete perfection. We can perceive virtue in
experience. But much must still be added[;] thus it is an idea. - The
907 doctrine of ideas is very important but actually belongs in metaphysics.
Until now, it has been expounded wrongly. But if one does not distinguish it
properly, then we cannot properly determine the use of our cognitions.
Ordinary authors use the word idea completely wrongly. E.g., people speak
of the idea of the color red, although this is not at all a notio. People speak of
the idea of a triangle, although it is only a notio. In metaphysics it is shown
that notiones0 are either intellectual or sensitive.Notionesp in tellectuales are
necessity, cause, etc., which are labeled with the name categories. Notionesq sensitives are where an object of the senses is given, which I can
cognize not in empirical intuition but in pure intuition. The concept of a
triangle is a notio sensitiva, then. Ideas exclude all our cognitions/ They are
drawn merely from reason, but they influence experience as rules in accordance with which one can obtain the most experiences.
How do concepts arise} I.e., how do representations become concepts?
a pure intellectual concept, or a notion.
Reading "notiones" for "rau'ones."
Reading "Notiones" for "Ran'ones."
Reading "Notiones" for "Ran'ones."
"Kenntniße."
350
Logic does not concern itself with how dataL for a cognition must be
constituted, but rather merely with what the understanding does in connection with them[; it] pays heed to form, then, and not to the object. How
does it happen, then, that a repraesentatio singularis becomes communist
Resp. per comparationem, sepamtionem, sen abstractionem.' I compare things
and attend to that which they have in common, and I abstract from all
otiier things; thus this is a concept, tiirough which all these things can be
thought.
In logic it is a misuse for one to retain the expression to abstract so that
one says aliquidre abstrahe.' E.g., as if, in order to have the concept of a
tree, I took the concept of the leaves and of the trunk in particular, and
abstracted from all differences among trees, and said that what has a trunk
and leaves is a tree. No, I do not abstract the leaves and the trunk; rather, I
retain them, and I separate them from everything else. I have to pay heed
to that which a cognition has that is common, and abstractfrom that which
it has that is different!,] e.g., from the magnitude or smallness of the tree.
Accordingly, the word must not be so used that we say aliquid abstrahere. I
abstract" from the remaining things. Abstraction does not add anything,
then, but rather cuts off everything that does not belong to the concept,
and notes merely what it has in common with other representations. The
differentiation of a concept involves comparatio, then. I must pay attention 908
to the agreement and identity of things, which is called wit, and secondly,
abstraäio. - It is wrongly expressed, then, when one speaks of conceptus
abstracti, since abstraai means as much as qui abstraaus est a re.v This is
wrong, nam non abstrahimus a re, sed separamus conceptum ab
aliis rebus, conceptum abstrahimus a ceteris™ We must abstract from
many things[;] when in the case of scarlet cloth I think the color red, I
already abstract from many colors[;] when in the case of scarlet cloth I
think only an extended being, I abstract from many more things[;] if in this
case I think merely that it is a thing, then I abstract from still more things.
We should actually say, though, that the use of a concept is abstract. For
every use of a concept is either in abstracto or concreto. I cognize a concept
in concreto when I apply it to that which is contained under it. I think a
concept in abstracto when I think it in general. From this we see that a
cognition is abstract only1 because the concept is thought in abstracto,
without being applied to objects. E.g. People talk of education3' and deal
* through comparison, separation, or abstraction,
to abstract something.
Reading "abstrahire" for "ignorire."
' which isabstracted from the thing.
for me do not abstract from the thing, but we separate the concept from other thingsfj we abstract
the concept from other things.
* Reading "nur" for "nicht."
* "Erziehung."
351
merely with the early cultivation of man's faculties2 without speaking of
the application to child-rearing." Here the concept is expounded not in
concrete, but rather merely in abstracto.
BRIEF REPETITION OF THE FOREGOING
The form of a concept consists in common validity. Repraesentatio, quae
pluribus est communis.b This constitutes a concept, then. -1 cannot say
conceptus communis, because this would be a tautology. A tautology is an
enunciation where I make a concept distinct by means of it itself. For if a
representation is not a repraesentatio communis, then it is not a concept at
all. Since it already lies hidden in the concept, I must not add it. - But the
use of a conceptus can be singularis. For what holds of many things can also
be applied to an individualcase. I think of a man in individuo, i.e., I use the
concept of man in order to have an ens singulare. I can make use of a
concept insofar as it is applied to many objects[;] then the concept is used
as a repraesentatio communis, i.e., is used in abstracto, e.g., house. If I say of
909 all houses, now, that they must have a roof, then this is the usus universalis.
It is always the same concept, however, and is here used wholly universally. For having a roof holds for all houses. This use of the concept is
concerned universally with all, then. But a particular use is concerned
only with many. E.g., some houses must have a gate. Or I use the concept
only for an individual thing. E.g., this house is plastered in this way or
that. We do not divide concepts into universales, particulars, singulares,
then, but instead judgments, as we shall soon hear. In my judgment I can
compare the thing with all, some, or an individual thing. This serves to
determine our expressions exactly, and not to speak of everything in
universal concepts. In kind, all concepts are universal and can always hold
of others things in a certain way. E.g., plant holds for all grasses, but also
for some bodies. The understanding has the faculty of concepts, and one
can also define it thus. We said above that the understanding is the faculty
of rules. But this is the same thing, for when I give a concept, I alwaysgive
a foundation for rules.
Concepts arise per comparationem, reflexionem, et abstraäionem.' In one
consciousness I grasp many representations, in which I compare what is
only a repetition of the other. From reflection, then, one cognizes that
which many things have in common[;] afterward one takes away through
abstraction that'' in which they they do not agree, and then a repraesentatio
z "von der frühen Bildung des Menschen."
" "Kinderzucht."
* A representation that is common to many.
' through comparison, reflection, and abstraction.
' Reading "nimmt mandurch dieabstraction dasweg"for"nimmtmandie abstraction
weg."
352
communis remains. No concept comes to be, then, without comparison,
without perception of an agreement, or without abstraction. If I could not
abstract I would not have any concepts, because something other than
what is common to the individualrepresentations' would alwaysbe occurring to me. E.g. If someone were such that in the case of the expression
house what occurred to him was always just the tavern that he had seen, he
would always preserve an intuitus. We see that no concept comes to be
through omitting and abstracting; instead, this perfects a concept and
makes it so that it does not remain a [conceptus] singularis. When a concept
arises, the positive thing is comparing and reflecting, the negative thing is
abstracting. For many a man it is hard to abstract, even if he can readily
compare and reflect. When one has to do with such men one has a lot of
trouble, therefore. Custom has led them to a point where it costs them
great effort to omit that which does not belong to the concept. Most men
have such bad principles because they think so vulgarly and cannot ab- 910
stract the respectable, the proper, etc., from a concept of virtue.
An abstract concept is abstract only in use. It is less abstract when I say in
concreto what I have said in abstracto. E.g., a body is an extension that has a
figure. Now I give an example, i.e., I take all the things that I have omitted
in the concept. The concept is used in abstracto when I omit all the
differences that are common to the thing. A concept always arises through
abstraction, consequently, but the concept itself is not abstract; rather, its
use is. The use of a concept in concreto has its degrees, until finally the
concept becomes maxime in concreto and belongs only to an Individuum. In
just the same way, I can always go further in abstraction, too. E.g., man,
animals, living being, etc.
Every concept contains more possible concepts under itself and contains that which is common to various representations of several things.
Thus if a concept contains something that is common to several things, it
is itself contained in other possible concepts[;] it is a part of them, but
contains only that which they have in common and omits what is different
in them. Every universal concept is contained in the concepts from which
it is abstracted, then. E.g., the concept metal belongs to gold, copper, etc.
Conversely, these things are contained under it, and this is just what
constitutes the usefulness of a concept. In the case of intuition, I have no
usefulness other than an individualobject.Now the ground always contains
the consequences under itself. Accordingly, every universal concept is a
ground of cognition for many things, and furnished with a concept, I have a
ground of cognition of many things. The concept itself is also contained in
the things, however. For it constitutes a part of their representation/
A concept is called a higher concept insofar as it contains others under
Reading "den einzelnen Vorstellungen"for "der einzelnen Vorstellung."
f Reading "Vorstellung" for "Vernunft."
353
itself, and every concept is consequently a higher representation of others,
because it always contains many under itself. A lower concept is a concept
that is contained under others. E.g., man is an animal. The concept of
animal belongs to all men and to still more things, too[;] consequently
man is a lower concept than animal. - Allconceptus stand in relation to each
other in such a way that a conceptus is always superior^ and inferior^ relative
911 to the others, insofar as one is contained under anotherf;] and from this,
finally, there comes a series of subordinate concepts. The conceptus infimus
cannot be determined. For as soon as I have a concept that I apply to
individua, it would still be possible for there to be still smaller differences
among the individua, although I make no further distinction. Now in this
gradation, one concept is always higher than another, until I come to the
highest. The lowest cognition is intuition, because it is always concerned
with something unique. I can set forth the conceptus summits, because there
must be a concept in which I can omit everything. For if I wish to make a
higher concept, I always have to abstract. If I cannot abstract, however,
then no higher concept can be madef;] e.g., [the concept of] something.
- The conceptus superior, in regard to the inferior^, we call a genusL. When
we compare many things with one another, then, we can call every concept
the genusL in regard to its inferior^, species^ in regard to its superior^.
GenusL and species^ do not in themselves make any distinction among
concepts, then, but only in the relation of concepts. Learned man is a
genusL in regard to the philosopher, but learned man is a species in regard to
man. Now we can think of a series of genera^ and species^, among which
some will have to be genera superiora, until we finally come to a genus
summus, namely, something.
Every species is at the same time a genusL in regard to the species^ contained under it. A species infima is only comparativelyinßma, and is the last
in use. It must always be possible to find another speciesL, whereby this
latter would in turn become a genusL. But applied immediately to individua, a species can be called a species infima. —Here we can consider
the extension and the content of a concept. The extension of a concept is a
sphaera, and it is concerned with the multitude of things that are contained
under the concept. We consider the concept as to content when we look to
the multitude of the representations that are contained in the concept
itself. The greater the extension of a concept, the smaller is its content,
i.e., the less it contains in itself. E.g., the concept man has a large extension, but the concept Negro contains still more, namely, the concept of the
color black, too, [and it] consequently has more content. Now the higher a
concept is, the more one must abstract from the manifold, and the more
912 the content dwindles. It is a higher concept to the extent that it is contained in more things, and the more it contains that which belongs to
more things. Now since in the case of the highest concept I have to omit
so much that what remains to me is only what is common to all things, this
354
concept therefore contains the least of all. From the highest concept,
consequently, the lowest ones are determined, and this at the same time
comprehends the correct determination of all things. A thoroughly determined concept is the lowest under all concepts. For it is not common to
several things. A higher concept [is one] that is indeterminate multimode,g
and the highest concept is that which is indeterminate in all things. The
logical sphaera always grows, as a leaf of gold stretches when it loses in
thickness, and just on this account is it so hard for man to go to the
heights and to think things without content. The closer that concepts
come to experience, on the other hand, the fuller or more concrete the
representation is. The question arises, Which is better, a very concrete or
a very abstract representation, so that one approaches the individua or the
genera^ RespL.: the one is as good as the other. It is lovely* if our representations have a large sphere. For a concept is always valid for what is contained under it[;] consequently the universality of cognition always rests
on the sphere. But irrespective of this, the concept does lose in content,
and this lack is unavoidable, and in regard to the human understanding is
regrettable. Everylower concept is also called angustior,' every one that has
a higher sphaera is called latiorJ The genusL is always a conceptus latior,
then, the species^ a conceptus angustior. When two concepts stand next to
one another and have the same sphaera, they are called conceptus reciproci.
The chapter about definitions is the most important one in logic. For the
greatest demand that one can put on a philosopher is always that he
should define his concept. All logical perfection of our cognition consisted
in the fact that our concept was distinct. The second perfection was that it
also be complete, namely, that distinctness not rest on a few clear marks,
but that it rest on as many marks as, taken together, constitute the concept. If, now, the concept is exhaustive, then no mark is lacking, of course.
But although no mark is lacking, a mark could perhaps be superfluous, in
that one mark could already be contained in another. This is an imperfection in the concept, if we multiply marks unnecessarily, and through 913
tautologies make one mark into many marks. It also belongs to the logical
perfection of a concept, accordingly, that the concept be precise, i.e., that
the concept not contain more marks than are necessary to constitute the
concept. Precise, praedsus, is not a good Latin expression. Determinate,
however, which is what the author calls precise, means nothing at all. For
a concept that contains too little is indeterminatus[;] a concept would be
determinate, consequently, where more and more is added, and the concept is consequently exhaustive.* But in connection with plants, praeg in many ways.
* "schön."
' narrower.
' broader.
* Reading "ausführlich" for "nicht ausführlich."
355
cidere is used for cutting back, and thus it is with our concepts, too, which
we cut back in regard to superfluous marks. If we take completudo and
precision together, we can call a concept adequate. It is adequate to the
object when the marks contain neither more nor less than directly constitutes the concept. The concept must be complete in order not to be too
small, precise in order not to be too large. A definition is a conceptus
distinaus adaequatm, then. But Wolff takes the word completely differently
and calls a concept adequate where I do not merely have clear marks, but I
cognize the marks themselves distinctly. These are intensive degrees of
distinctness, however, of which we are not speaking here. Now if the
marks are clear, then a definition is already present.' If I can also define
the marks, then this is a definition of the parts of the definition. If a
concept whose marks are merely distinct is called adequate by him, then
he is already at the end. But one can still make the marks of marks
distinct. For us, however, the expression adequate, or conceptus adaequatus,
completes the definition and fits the object. Our definition, then, says as
much as definitio est conceptus distinaus completuspraedsus."1
DIVISION OF ALL DEFINITIONS
Definition has a certain perfection, which nothing can surpass. One could
object, Won't you give marks of marks in the definition? RespL. One can
also define marks of marks, and make a new definition from this. Since
[definitions] constitute the greatest perfection of a concept, then, we have
914 to be acquainted with all the requisita of them, and we have to see to what
extent it is possible to make them, how far we will get with this. All our
concepts are either given concepts or ones that are made. A concept is
given insofar as it does not arise from my faculty of choice. It can be given,
however, either a priori merely in the understanding, or aposteriori though
experience. I have many concepts that are given to me through the nature
of my understanding, and which I have not fabricated. E.g., the concept of
cause, time, etc. In just the same way, many concepts are given to us
through experience. E.g., that water is a fluid body.
Conceptus dati" are contradistinguished from conceptus factitii, concepts
that are made, which likewise are made either a priori or a posteriori. A
concept is made a priori when it is made through pure reflection, without
the objects being given through experience. E.g., I represent a iooo-sided
figure, without ever having seen it. Such a concept is also called a conceptus
fiaitius, a fabricated concept. A concept that is thought up" seems [a]
better [name] to me. I can also make a concept a posteriori, so that the
' "so ist es schon eine definition hinten her."
" A definition is a concept that is complete, distinct, and precise.
" Concepts that are given.
" "ein ausgedachter Begriff."
356
object is given to me in experience. E.g., I have a piece of metal[;] that is
always given aposteriori, not made. If I want to have a distinct concept of it,
however, then I have to test the metal for all its properties, and in this way
I find them through various experiences, which do not lie in the concept[;]
the nature of metal is thus a concept made aposteriori.
To make a concept a posteriori, then, is to trace given experiences
further, and thus to draw out an adequate concept. - This would be
nothing more, then, than to extend the concept. -
All our concepts, insofar as they are given to us, be it a priori or a
posteriori, can be defined only through analysis/ For because it is given, I
cannot make it distinct except by making clear the marks that lie in it, and
that is just analysis. If this analysis is complete, then there comes from this
a complete distinctness. If subsequently the marks are not too many, then
it is precise, and thus arises a definition.
If concepts are not given but made, however, so that we are not merely
to produce the distinctness of the concept but to make the concept itself,
then we will be able to bring about a definition of the concept only per
synthesin. E.g., if I want to represent a spirit, then I must make the concept
for myself. I say I want to represent a thinking being that is not combined 915
with any body. Here I have made the concept for the first time through the
definition. Concepts that are made cannot possibly be defined, then,
except per synthesin. All of mathematics defines per synthesin[;] it does not
define given concepts, but concepts that are made. I want to think a
figure, says the mathematician, that looks so and so, and is to be called
such and such. We can also have a concept a priorifactitius, the materials
for which experience has given, while the concept itself has been made.
E.g. Let one think an unconquerable fortification, the like of which does
not exist at all. The materials, such as moats, stone - lie in experience.
The concept itself is factitius. This is how it happens with someone who
invents a new instrument.
A posteriori, however, there are ahofactitii conceptus. If I want to define a
concept through experience* by clarifying, through experience, what is not
contained in my concept, then this must also occur per synthesin. I want to
produce a concept more extensive than I had[;] by this means I finally get
a concept that consists of marks that I collected per synthesin from
experience. - It is a universal rule, then, that all given concepts can only
be defined analytically, all concepts that are made, be they made through
the understanding or through experience, can only be defined synthetically. When can I say that a concept is defined in the analysis^. When all its
marks are complete and precise. When can we be certainly convinced that
our analysis is complete? RespL. We never can be, because it can happen
p "per analysin . . . durch die Zergliederung."
* Reading "einen Begriff durch die Erfahrung" for "eine Erfahrung."
357
only through experiments, in which we can always overlookmuch[;] consequently all analytic definitions are combined with uncertainty. If a concept
is a concept of experience, then it is harder to knowr that I have analyzed
correctly. Through analysis one never has apodeictic certainty. We cognize analytic definitions in such a way that one cannot set forth any sure
criteriumL for them.
Synthetic definitions, insofar as they have a fabricated object, can never
err, because I say, in accordance with my faculty of choice, that I want to
think this. - Synthetic definitions of concepts drawn from experience are
completely impossible. We cannot make an object complete in experience
916 and set forth all the marks that constitute the concept. For experimental
physics from time to time discovers still further properties of bodies.
Analytically, I make a given concept distinct by merely expounding the
concept[;] per synthesin, however, I make a distinct concept. If we are to
define a concept analytically, then it is just given us to, and we are just to
make it complete and precise. - If this analysis is just incomplete, this is
not a definition, but it is at least a degree of distinctness, which can be
carried further and can approximate more and more to completudo. Before
a concept becomes complete it must necessarily be incomplete beforehand, and secondly, it is also not always possible to attain complete concepts. Could there occur a distinct concept that is not yet complete? I can
of course use an incomplete5 analysis, too, because I do at least have some
clear marks already. Hence it is not always possible, with every concept,
for me to have defined it, and it is not necessary, in order to speak of an
object, that one have defined it per analysin. For where I cannot say
everything, I must at least say as much as I can say with truth. Definitions
are not as necessary as people believe, consequently, and this is to be
noted, because in most cases definition is extremely hard, and analytic
completeness cannot alwaysbe expected. Because the incomplete analysis
is nonetheless still a part of the definition, however, and consequently is at
least true and correct, it becomes clear that we are certain that we cognize
enough in the incomplete' analysis. E.g., when I say that virtue is a readiness in morally good actions, and in doing so I omit that it is also a mastery
over our inclinations, I ask, Can nothing at all be inferred from the first,
incomplete concept? [Au\ contraire. Most philosophers have deduced all
their morals from the first concept. I can draw consequences from every
mark of a thing[;] if I cognize only a few marks in the thing, then a few
consequences can be drawn[;] if I cognize everything, however, then all
the consequences can be drawn. To begin initially with the definition,
then, as happens in most philosophies, and not to commit oneself to
"weniger merkclich zu wissen."
Reading "incomplete" for "complete."
Reading "incompleten" for "completen."
358
anything until one first has the definition, is actually to make all investigation impossible. For I must begin first from the imperfect. The endeavor
of philosophers is of course to attain the greatest perfection through
definitions. We must not say, however, that that of which no definition has 917
been given does not deserve any treatment. For there are many things of
which we cannot give a complete concept. E.g., jurists have never yet been
able to give a definition of fairness.
Concepts that are given a priori independently of experience can be
defined analytically. For here the concept concerns an object that I am to
cognize through the understanding alonef;] consequently, whatever I am
to say of it must be in my understanding, because we cannot go out of our
understanding and seek elsewhere. Thus the whole of metaphysics and
morals has to do with analytic definition. But although these two sciences
are the true objects of analytic definitions, it is obvious nonetheless that
definitions are not always unavoidably necessary[;] in the case of analytic
definitions, rather, one must never begin by saying that this or that is a
definition. For that all analysis is complete requires a proof[;] I must first
show that the marks lie in the concept, and then show that taken together
they constitute the concept.
It would be excellent and would give great worth to our cognitions if, in
philosophy, we had concepts that are adequate to the object, and which
also did not exceed precision, for this is the aim of our sciences. But since
we are not in a position to accomplish such a thing, we must make do with
as many clear marks as we can discover in our reason. Such incomplete
concepts, which also occur in physics, we call descriptions.
To want to say straight away that this alone constitutes the concept is
too dictatorial. For we first have to say how we have come to the analysis^.
What Wolff attempts in his philosophy is wholly false, then, and on this
account each of his definitions is also false in philosophy. Concepts are
commonly analyzed incompletely, although one cannot deny that he sets
forth rather clear marks, and that he often comes quite close to the whole
concept, and that regardless of [the incompleteness] his definitions in
philosophy and in natural law can well be used, since they show much
acuity. He learned to put definitions at the beginning in mathematics,
where this is admittedly very good, because mathematics has synthetic
definitions. One finds this even in society." One speaks, e.g., of justice,
and someone says, Define justice for me. He wants me to have probed all
the depths of the concept, instead of engaging in reasoning" about what 918
we know, and what lies in the concept, too.
Thus it happens that such definitions are always w/,«, false, and that
"in Gesellschaften."
"raisonniren."
359
Baumeister's defined philosophy1" teems with errors.32 - Of mathematical
definitions not a single one is false, because the concepts are made arbitrarily[;] but all analytic [definitions] are given concepts. Can concepts of
experience be defined analytically?When the inquirer into nature defines
water, e.g., as a fluid body without taste or color, one readily sees how
precarious the definition is. He who is not already acquainted with water
will not thereby become acquainted with it. It is simply not necessary to
define concepts of experience per analysin, however. For why do I need
such a definition? For when I say the word water, others understand me.
The definition, however, is completely unsuitable for acquainting others
with water. For in the concept water there lies so little that I immediately
go outside the concept and have to collect new marks through experience,
i.e., I have to define the concept through exposition synthetically, and not
analytically. An empirical concept can well be defined in accordance with
that which lies in it. But one never seeks this, because so very little lies in
it. It cannot be defined synthetically either, however, because we cannot
be acquainted with all the possible marks that experience can teach concerning an object[;] consequently concepts of experience can never be
defined.
The result of all that has been said, then, is that our concepts are
either given or made. The given ones are either empirical concepts or
concepts of the understanding. A given concept of experience cannot
properly be defined' either per synthesin or per analysin, because in the
first case I can only define^ it through new marks, [while] in the latter
case too little lies in the concept to be able to distinguish it from others.
With concepts of the understanding, and in particular with ones that are
given, a proper analytic definition is likewise impossible, which is due
not to the thing, however, but to us, since it is hard to set forth the
marks of a concept precisely. Arbitrary concepts can be made both a
priori and a posteriori, but only synthetically. Only conceptus arbitrarii
(factitif),z which are made per synthesin arbitrariam," can be defined syntheticallyf;] these include all mathematical concepts. Indeed, what is still
more, with a conceptus arbitrarius one always has to begin with the defini-
919 tion, because the very concept is produced through this, and because
through this very thing I declare what I want to say through such a
concept, which I have made arbitrarily!;] without definition, consequently, such a concept would be nothing.
A nominaldefinition is that distinct concept which suffices for differentiation of a thing from others. A real definition is that distinct concept which
* "definirte philosophic."
* "erklärt."
' "erklären."
* concepts that are arbitrary (made).
" through an arbitrary syndiesis.
360
suffices for cognizing and deriving* everything that belongs to the thing[;]
it suffices for explaining the thing internally, consequently, and for understanding what belongs to the thing.
It is essential and contains the concept of the essence of the thing.
Nominal definition, on the other hand, is sufficient only externally, in
comparison with others, in order to have insight into its identity or difference with others. It means almost nothing more than what the expression
nominal definition says, a certain attestation to the name of the thing, in
order to make the name of the thing distinct, but not to have better insight
into the thing itself. It does not comprehend the essence of the thing, but
only a comparison of a few marks of differentiation with others. Hence it
can also have only comparative validity. E.g., when I say that man is an
animal that has the faculty of speech. Here I can differentiate him from all
animals (but not from the starling). Nonetheless, the concept is sufficient
in comparison with other animals. -
How can I know that my concept is sufficient to distinguish the thing
from all possible [other things]? RespL. Only those marks which, taken
together, constitute the whole essence of the thing can suffice absolutely,
for the whole essence of the thing cannot be - common to twothings.And
this is a real definition, then. Nominal definitions are valid only insofar as I
make use of them. Real definitions are the actual definitions, then. When
Wolff says that the genesis of the concept can also be comprehended from
the real definition, this is false. For the genesis must be inferred subsequently from the real definition. For it makes possible the judgment as to
how it could have arisen. His examplesbring to lightwhatwehave said - as,
e.g., he sets forth as a real definition that a circle is a curved line which
moves around a fixed point, and whose parts are equally distant from the
mid-point[;] the first is superfluous, because it can be inferred from the
last. The genesis is only a deduction from the real definition. That is all 920
Wolff says, too. Otherwise, real definition has nothing to do with the genesis, but only with the internal possibility of the thing. - If I cognize a thing
in accordance with an attributum proprium, then I can also define it by
means of such an attributumproprium. E.g., man is an animal that judges.
Because the judgment is an attributumproprium of a man, it must necessarily flow from the whole essence of man. If it flowed only from a part, then
many things, which are different in essence, could agree with the essence
[of man] as to this part. The definition holds for the whole essence, then.
For it cannot be understood except asofthe whole essence. - Through the
real definition the thing can always be distinguished, and from all other
things. It is hard to distinguish the two, and often one regards as a real
definition what was only a nominal definition. In the case of synthetic
objects, definitions are always real. For the object is given a priori only
* Reading "abzuleiten" for "abzusondern."
361
through this one definition, and [only] through this definition is it possible
to think it[;] but to make real definitions of given, analytic objects is very
hard. I cannot even know whether my nominal definition is sufficient,
because I can never find the marks to distinguish the thing from all possible
other things, because I cannot compare it with allpossible things[;] but only
when I know that my marks exhaust the whole concept, i.e., when I can give
a real definition, is a nominal definition also certainly sufficient. Such is the
case with all definitions in natural science. - In morals, metaphysics, etc.,
on the other hand, there must be nothing but real definitions, because this
is the aim toward which we must direct all our analysis, to bring about a
complete concept. Definition is actually a complex of marks, a review or
exposition of them, insofar as they contain the materials for a possible
concept. Describing is not a determinate rule. One can be as long-winded
as one wants, or one can be brief. We can accomplish much by thereby
characterizing things beforehand. Nevertheless, descriptions always precede definitions for those concepts that are empirical[;] indeed, since we
cannot define empirical concepts, they are only capable of description.
Concepts apriori, on the other hand, if they are made per synthesin, e.g., in
921 mathematics, must always be defined. A given concept of reason need not
always be defined, however; instead, we often put up with an incomplete
concept. In concepts of reason, however, descriptions are not at all suitable.
Thus, e.g., Lavater, who through the liveliness of his imagination more
often gives excursions than he does exhaust things, sets forth very many of
love's effects when he describes love.33 But from all this one cannot get
precisely the concept of what love is. Descriptions are not at all suited for
speculative sciences, but only inpraxisL, where I can combine a lively image
with my concept.
Distinctness is the all-important thing in definition. Then follows
completudo. Precision, however, is not as important as completudo. This
precision is in many cases hard, because without noticing we take one
mark twice, because we hold things that have different names to be
different. E.g., a body is an extended, divisible being. Here extension
already lies in divisibility. In descriptions one does not take the whole at all
exactly, because here one seeks only the proposition for a possible definition, which one perhaps does not want to make at all. Thus in the catechism I can give many descriptions of God as to his properties, although I
see in the end that the precise concept of God is a being of all beings.
Even in definition it does not matter at all if something is lacking in
precision, and there is too much in the definition. That cannot do any
harm, unless one violates the canon, Quod fieri potest perpauca,c etc. Precision is only a law of economy, and it makes the consciousness of
What can be done by means of few things . ..
362
completudo easier. How do we pass judgment on a proffered definition?
RespL. We ask:
1. Is the definition, as a proposition, true? Does that which is said of the thing in
the definition actually belong to it? E.g., it is a true proposition that a ground
is that on the basis of which I cognize why something is.
2. The concept must be distinct. If something is true as a proposition, it is not
yet on that account distinct as a concept. Thus the example above does not
become at all distinct through the definition. For why means as much as
through which ground. Consequently, I would have said that a ground is that on
the basis of which I cognize dirough which ground something is true. This is
idem per idem,d dien. This is a principal mistake, which is very common, and
most definitions' in discourses are of this kind.
3. Once the concept is true as a proposition and is also distinct, then I can ask 922
whether the distinct concept is also complete. Do the marks, taken together,
constitute the complete concept? This is very hard. For how can we know that
our concept lacks nothing more, and that we have left nothing out? To be
sure, we do not notice that something is still lacking. But that is not a sufficient ground for calling the concept complete. For how often do we fail to
notice something that we subsequently find?
4. The exhaustive concept must also be determined. This can still be done, and
if it is not there, then diis is not a great mistake. Precision is the reduction of
definition ad minimos terminos[;] just as I2/24 can be reduced to 1A, so too must I
be able to cut back^the concept. It is lovelywhen we can do this, and when we
know how to express all our definitions in sententious propositions. This is
the elegance of a cognition.
A false definition can contain true propositions, accordingly, and be
possible in spite of this, although it canot be held to be a conceptadequate
to the thing. Only I must convert it. Otherwise a mistake arises, since the
one mark does not exhaust the whole thing.
Through what is a concept made distinct? Through clear marks. If
these marks are tautological,however, i.e., if one is contained in another,
then the concept does not in the least become distinct, although it sometimes seems to, because the tautology is hidden therein[;] something one
must look carefully for in investigatingthe definition.
How are definitions found, then? It is obvious that this only applies to
analytic definitions. For in the synthesis of an arbitrary concept, where I
make a concept, the definition need not be found, because I saydistinctly
what I have invented in the understanding. Such definitions of the mathematician are actually only declarationsof his willed opinion,^ and mathematical definitions need no rule at all, consequently.For he need only say
the same through the same.
"Erklärungen."
"praecidiren."
"declarationen seiner Willensmeinung."
363
to anyone what sort of concept he wants to establish.* Nonetheless, mathematici sometimes go wrong concerning their concept, and in ancient times
more seldom than in modern times. Euclid never did it. But Wolff brings
all of philosophy into mathematics. When he gives the concept of similarity, he analyzes the concept. But here there can be a great risk that he has
not made his analysis complete. Everything the mathematicus says, how-
923 ever, must be undoubtedly certain. Hence [Wolff] should have said that a
similar figure, which I want to think, is, etc. Here, consequently, things
must always be defined synthetically.
In the case of analytic definition the rules are the following: Seek true
marks. You want to analyze, so attend to the marks and seek true ones,
which actually belong to the thing. Those propositions which are found
through the analysis of a concept, through which I become conscious of
the marks of the concept, could be called elementary propositions, because they present the elements for definition. For although a definition
does not yet come from these, they are nonetheless the representations for
a definition, etc. E.g., if I say, Virtue is a readiness, a freedom in action,
etc., here I seek through analysis one mark after another, in order thereby
to attain the definition.
Now let us analyze the concept and seek as many elementary propositions as we can. Then we have to see whether this or that mark does not
contain yet another, however[;] and here one must then guard oneself
against ever placing a mark in the definition twice. - Now if I have sought
true propositions, and in doing so have seen that these marks are different
marks, then I collect them all again and compare them with the whole
concept, and thus place them together again. But here we find the whole
difficulty, namely, that the analysis can still be accomplished, but it is
extremely hard to know whether the marks are present completely[;] and
we have cause to be very distrustful about this. Since we cannot always
maintain that our analysis is complete, then, we must attend to our definition with fear and trembling. And since the thing is so hard, I would say
that I will define as an attempt, that I will establish a definition as an
attempt, as it were, that I will not rely on it as on something free of
mistakes, and that I intend to regard it as if it were not a definition. Here I
can maintain, then, that even if it is not a definition it must nonetheless be
(i.) a true proposition, (2.) a distinct concept, even if it is not a completely
distinct concept.
I will be able to make good use of this presumptive definition. For I will
always be able to say, Cuicompetit definitum, eicompetitdefinitio.'E.g., he who
is virtuous has a firm resolve to act. This definitio always belongs to the
definitum of the virtuous. But I will not be able to say, conversely, Cui
* "etabliren und festsetzen."
1 The definition agrees with that with which the defined agrees.
364
competit definitio, illi competit definitum.' I cannot say, conversely, that he who 924
has a firm resolve to act is virtuous, and in fact I do not call him virtuous. I
see quite well, then, that from a presumptive definition I can make any
direct concept*, but I will not be able to convert it, because I have not named
everything, and have not cognized all the marks completely. I can say, e.g.,
that man is a rational animal, but not that everyrational animal is a man. For
in the definition something islacking. - NowifI believe,finally,that I have
all the marks completely together, and if I place them together, then I do not
have to look to anything further, except that my definition be precise. This
last is good and nice, but it does not constitute an essential requisitum of
definition, so that even without precision such concepts have their sufficient usefulness. - If in the definition I have sought the first thing, namely,
merely true propositions, then I define obscurum per aeque obscurum,1 and
one could call these tautological propositions. - With definitions, if they
are otherwise simply true propositions, one can accomplish much, even if
there is not an exhaustive concept. But he who wants to reciprocate, must
have a complete concept.
Universal rules of definition.
1. One should not define by means of a circle. To define™ by means of a
circle is to define by means of a mark that presupposes the concept as
definitum. E.g., if I define a ground as a cause of why something is, then
my mark, why, i.e., based on which ground, is such a mark, which already
means the concept of a ground. This drculus vitiosus occurs quite frequently. One takes a mark, and without examining further whether the
concept by itself, independently of the concept, is clear definitive^, one
defines" idem per idem."
2. Definitio nee sit latior, nee angustior suo definito.p\ demand a
complex of marks, which, taken together, exhibit the whole concept.*
Hence one seeks not more marks, and not fewer, than are necessary, so
that the definitio and the definitum are reciprocal, i.e., so that one can be
put in place of the other. E.g., if I saythat a body is an impenetrable being
that is heavy, then the definitio is angustior definito.' For through the mark
of heaviness, the concept of body is too restricted and narrow. For it is
concerned only with bodies with which we are acquainted[;] consequently,
if the definition has too much determination, it becomes angustior definito.' 925
' The defined agrees with that with which the definition agrees.
* "daß ich von einer praesumtiven definition mir jeden directen Begriff machen kann."
' the obscure through the equally obscure.
" "erklären."
" "erklärt."
" the same through the same.
p A definition should not be either broader or narrower than the defined.
* Reading "den ganzen Begriff" for "den ganzen Inbegriff."
' narrower than the defined.
' narrower than the defined.
365
The more indeterminate a concept is, however, the greater is its sphaem, et
latior est definitio definite.' E.g., if I say figure, that applies to many things. If
I say a three-sided figure, then it is already more restricted, etc. A latior
definitio" is a concept which is determined enough by the definition[;] an
angustior [definitio]," on the other hand, [is] when it is too hemmed in by
too much determination.
OF LOGICAL DIVISION
On this we can be quite brief. A universal concept has a sphaem, and has
lower concepts under itself. We investigate these lower ones insofar as the
lower concepts are distinguished from one another. Division is thus the
complete representation [of these lower concepts] insofar as they are
considered according to their difference [s], in which, taken together, they
are equal to the sphaera of the whole concepts. E.g., all beings on earth are
organized or not organized. The organized ones are plants or animals.
Logical division is nothing other than the taking apart of the sphaera of a
concept. This dividing is something other than taking apart. In the case of
division, I distinguish the manifold under the concept, i.e., the sphaera. In
the case of taking apart, I analyze the concept. I do not analyze the
concept itself [in division], but rather I only divide the sphaera, the lower
concepts, insofar as they are contained under the universal.
The larger a concept's sphaera is, the less it contains in itself." It contains all the more in itself, however, the less it contains under itself. In
every division of a concept, then, we divide this concept into its parts
without taking the concept apart, i.e., one divides the multitude of things
that are contained under the universal concept. And this will be capable of
being continued[;] the greater the sphaera that the concept has, the more
members of the division there will be, and the smaller its sphaera is, the
fewer members of the division there will be. Since every concept has a
greater sphaera, the fewer parts it has, it follows that a concept can be
divided all the more, the fewer parts it has. E.g. We represent many things
under the concept of animals. There are animals that move on land, in the
air, and in water, the mark of all of which is movement. We have not taken
926 the concept of animal apart here, i.e., analyzed it. For then we would have
to have said that an animal is a material, which lives, etc. No, we divide the
concept. We only see how many kinds are contained under the concept. In
every division we represent, first of all, that a multitude of various things
completely fills up the sphaera of a concept, i.e., [that they] are equal to the
sphaera of the concept, consequently that no concept, as a part, is lacking.
' and the definition is broader than the defined.
" broader definition.
" narrower [definition].
* Reading "in sich" for "unter sich," in accordance with Lehmann's correction (24:1102).
366
Secondly, [we represent] that these various concepts, all of which are
supposed to be contained in the sphaera of the concept, are different from
one another, hence that one part of the sphaera is not contained in another.
We say, then, in accordance with the example we used, that all animals,
divided according to movement, are such as can move either on the earth,
or in the air, or in water. This either, or expresses the fact that they are
different, and that one kind is opposed to the other. Through the word all,
however, one expresses the fact that together the marks constitute the
concept. -
In every division, then, we have a sphaera and membra dividentia* These
latter must be opposed to one another and, taken together, must fill up the
whole sphaera of the conceptus. E.g., if I say that all men are either virtuous
or vicious, this does not hold. For there are men who have no character at
all, as, e.g., a savage. Many rules appear in logic, and it is good that we
indicate them, so that one may prove that one understands all the actions
of the understanding that appear in connection with its operations. But
these rules are of such a kind that one can easily dispense with these rules
as precepts, because everyone observes them by himself, and later can
also expound them in abstracto. Such is, e.g., this rule for division: the
divided concept must not be wider or narrower than all the members of
the division, when they can be taken together by means of an opposition[;]
that is, the division must not lack a member. For if a member is lacking,
then the concept would have a greater sphaera, because I would not have
enumerated all the members, i.e., [the concept] would be broader. If I say
more members than there actually are, then the divided concept has a
smaller sphaera. Here one sees how hard it is to be able to give a rule of
the understanding in abstracto. Everyone thinks it in concrete, however,
without being conscious of this. In such cases, therefore, one must not
think of the rules in abstracto, but rather of the examples in concreto, which
one has before oneself. - The members of a division must also be opposed to one another. For otherwise I would not be able to say either, or. 927
From this we see everything that is already mentioned in the prolegomena, p. 14.34 The common and healthy understanding is quite familiar
with the rules. It cognizes only in concreto, however. The speculative understanding, on the other hand, can also prove them in abstracto. —In mathematics such rules are quite good. It is also a science, however, that cannot
be thought at all without abstraction. A divided concept must not contradict any member of the division. E.g., if I say that all triangles are round or
four-sided. In a division, the members ought to be contained under the
concept, i.e., the concept of the division must be contained in them, which
is not the case here, because neither round nor four-sided triangles are
contained under the concept of a triangle.
* members of the division.
367
We have to distinguish division, subdivision, and codivision. Division in
general is the representation of the manifold concepts that are opposed to
one another and that fill up the whole sphaera of the concept. Now this can
be continued. I can divide a concept in one respectus and then again in
another respectus. All [humans] are virtuous or vicious as to character, men
or women as to sex, young or old as to age, learned or unlearned as to
cognition/ etc. This is codivison, where each time I only divide a given
conceptus. I can also subdivide the concept, however. Then I divide the
members of the division. Every subdivision is thus a division of a membrum
dividentium. E.g., men are learned or unlearned. Learned men are learned
in matters of reason [or] learned in matters of experience.2 Those learned
in matters of reason are philosophers or mathematicians, etc. For someone who accepts species infima, these subdivisions will finally have an end.
Since we have just shown, however, p. 373,35 that in the nature of the thing
every species can always contain further species inferiores, we will never come
upon such concepts, whose sub-contained concepts cannot be divided
again. Subdivision must proceed to infinity,then, although many a subdivision has an end, of course, comparative^, for us.
Codivision also goes to infinity. E.g., I can divide the triangle, in regard
to its latera, into equilateral and non-equilateral, in regard to its angles,
into right-angled and oblique-angled. More cannot be set forth here. But
928 in regard to the things of nature, uncountably many codivisions can be
given.
Quaeritur." How does all division proceed, actually?Is division by means
of our pure understanding always a pure division* only into two parts, and
then into subdivisions, i.e., is it always a dichotomy, so that all other
divisions are only subdivisions? Or can I divide a concept into more than
two parts right at the beginning? RespL. It is obvious that every immediate
division is a dichotomy. When we divide into several parts, this is
polytomy, which is in every case a subdivision. E.g. If I want to take apart
an apple into many pieces, I must nonetheless divide it first into two
pieces. These may be different as to size or not. Afterward I can divide it
into several parts. But these are subdivisions, then. Every immediate
division is consequently a dichotomy. Dichotomy is brought about immediately by the pure word, not. E.g., triangles are either equilateral or not
equilateral. Non-equilateral" triangles are either aequicrura* or scalena.
When they divide triangles into aequilatem, aequicrura, and scalena, then,
mathematicians have consequently brought the subdivision under the imy "Kenntniß."
* "Vernunft-Gelehrte, Erfahrungs-Gelehrte."
" It is asked.
* Reading "Eintheilung" for "Theilung."
' Reading "nichtgleichseitigen" for"gleichseitige."
d equal-legged (i.e., isosceles).
368
mediate division, and divided falsely. Since this is so extensive, however, it
is not always observed, because with many subdivisions one loses sight of
the conceptus divisus.
OF JUDGMENTS
A judgment is genemliter the representation of the unity in a relation of
many cognitions. A judgment is the representation of the way that concepts belong to one consciousness universally[,] objectively. If one thinks
two representations as they are combined together and together constitute
one cognition, this is a judgment. In every judgment, then, there is a
certain relation of different representations insofar as they belong to one
cognition. E.g., I say that man is not immortal. In this cognition I think the
concept of being mortal through the concept of man, and it thereby
happens that this cognition, which constitutes the unity of two different
representations, becomes a judgment.
Every judgment involves matter and form. The matter is the cognitions
generaliter and the concepts, the form must constitute the combination and 929
unity of the representation. If I say, e.g., that God is just, evil is punished,
and if another man asked, Are these rhapsodies that you are bringing
forth? then I would say, No! Because God is just, he therefore punishes
evil, which then constitutes the form through which the cognition is
brought to unity. All actions of the understanding that appear in a judgment reduce to 4, and all judgments are considered according to these.
Namely, first of all, as to their quality, they are divided into affirmative,
negative, and infinite judgments. Even if the logici say that infinite judgments can be used as affirmative ones, that is a proposition which can be
expounded in a special note. Basically, however, it is something different
as to form, and in the beginning one must divide just as the distinction of
the action[s] of our understanding is. How much is thought under this is
something that belongs in a note.
2. As to quantity, our judgments are divided into universal,particular, and singular judgments, and even if the logici show that as far as the matter is concerned, singular judgments amount to universal judgments, a singular judgment is nonetheless distinct from universal ones, and this must be distinguished at the beginning, although one can say afterward that singular judgments belong to the universal ones. The actus of the understanding are obviously different, although one sees that the one use of the understanding holds
as much as the other.
3. As to relation, judgments are divided' into categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive judgments.
4. As to modality, into problematic, assertoric, and apodeictic judgments. Each
of these 4 functions gives a particular kind of judgment, then.
' Reading "eingetheilet" for"getheilet."
369.
Quality is the relation of concepts insofar as they stand in the relation of
unity with one another[;] in accordance with this they are divided into
affirmative judgments, if I combine one concept with the other positively,
into negative judgments, if I separate one concept from the other, into
infinite judgments, if I restrict one concept by the other. E.g., men are
mortal[;] here I affirm mortality of men, or I think men as they stand
under the concept of mortality. No man is mortal[;] here I deny mortality
930 of man. If I think man, I think him as he is distinct from all that which is
mortal. Anima non est mortalis/ is a negative proposition. On the other
hand, Anima est non mortalisg is an infinite proposition. - All affirmative
propositions show their affirmation through the copulaL est,which copula^
indicates the relation of two concepts. When the copulaL est occurs
simpliciter, it means the connection of two concepts - when the copulaL est
is affected with the non, it means the opposition of the two concepts and
indicates that the one concept does not belong to the other, or is not
contained in the sphaera of the other. E.g., anima non est mortalis[\] here I
represent that mortality does not include the soul. If I say, however, anima
est non mortalis, then I say not merely that the soul contains nothing
mortal, but also that it is contained in the sphaera of everything that is not
mortal. In this case something special is said, then, namely, that I do not
merely exclude one concept from the sphaera of another concept, but also
think the concept under the whole remaining sphaera, which does not
belong under the concept that is excluded. I do not actually say, est
immortalis, but instead I say that the soul can be counted among all the
concepts in general that may be thought outside the concept of mortality.
And this actually constitutes infinite judgments. -
Affirmation and negation are qualities in judgment,accordingly. A negative judgment is not just any judgment that is negative, but a negative
judgment where the negation affects the copulaL. A judgmentis an affirmative judgment, accordingly, where it does not affect the copula^ but rather
the predicate, as occurs in an infinite judgment, and where the copula^ is
without any negation[;] consequently, all infinite judgments are affirmative, because the negation affects only the predicate. But although every
infinite judgment has the nature of the affirmative, nonetheless, there is
always a negation there, not of the judgment, i.e., of the relation of the
concepts, but of the predicate.
The relation is the same, to be sure, as in an affirmative judgment, but
the negation is still always there, and consequently infinite judgments are
distinct from the affirmative judgment. In logic, this matter seems to be a
subtlety. But in metaphysics it will be a matter of importance not to have
passed over it here. For there the disinction between reality, negation, and
f The soul is not mortal.
g The soul is non-mortal.
370THE V I E N N A LOGIC
limitation is greater. In the case of limitations I think something positive,
but not merely positive, but rather negative, too, and it is something
positive that is restricted. - They are called judida infinita because they
are unlimited. They only say what is not, and I can make uncountably
many such predicates, for the sphaera of the predicates which, affected by 931
non, can be said of the subject, is infinite.
The principle of all possible pmedicata contrarie oppositah must come
from the thing. This is the principle of thoroughgoing determination.
This thoroughgoing determination of a thing is impossible, however, because it involves an infinite cognition to seek out all the predicates that
belong to a thing[;] and hence I can proceed to infinity and still not
determine the thing in a thoroughgoing way. E.g., the soul is corporeal,
not corporeal. The soul is mortal, not mortal. In logical use they can count
here as affirmative.
For every thing is distinct from others through determination. All other
things that are affected with noncan be said of this. E.g.,the mark of stone
is hardness. Now I can proceed to infinity and say that a stone is not
metal, not wood, etc. Do I thereby say anything new? For what help is it
that I know that everything else outside the concept is not stone? The
sphaera of this everything else is infinite, and therefore these are called
judida infinita. The quantity of judgments is distinguished in such a way
that there are universal, particular, and singular judgments. E.g., All men
are mortal, Some men are mortal[,] Caesar is mortal. Here I have a
judidum universale, particulare, and singulare. In everyjudidum singulare the
predicate holds of the subject without exceptionf;] if I say, Caesar is
mortal, no exception can occur here, because the concept Caesar is a
singular concept, which does not comprehend a multitude under itself,
but is only an individual thing[;] consequently it holds without exception
in just the way that thejudidum universale does, namely, because it has no
sphaera from which something could be excepted. The [judidum] universale holds without exception because the sphaera comprehends everything,
and consequently the singularejudidum is equal to the universale in use.
There is a distinction here nonetheless, to which one must look, although
in the formal use both can go together.
The logici have a custom of making the matter distinct by means of
certain vocales' in the following verses:
AsseritA Negat E sed universaliter ambo.
Assent I Negat O sedparticulariter amboJ
predicates opposed as contraries.
' vowels.
' A affirms, E negates, but inboth cases universally. / affirms, Onegates, but inboth cases
particularly.
371
I.e., the vocalis A is universaliter affirmans. E.g., All men are mortal. E is
932 to mean ajudiäum universaliter negans. E.g., No man is mortal. Particulariter affirmans is /. E.g., Some men are learned[;] particulariter negans is
0. E.g., Some men are not learned. This is used later on in syllogistic,
where unintelligible words, e.g., celarent, barocco, which mean nothing,
are used in order to show the quality of the proposition through the
three vocales. - Thus we also have some school proverbs that must be
noted. One asks: Quae, qualis, quanta est proposition Quaepropositio relates
to the relation, are they categorical, hypothetical, or disjunctive propositions? Qualis propositio, are they affirmative or negative? Quanta propositio,
are they universal or particular propositions? From this the quality and
quantity of judgments arise.
The author deals here with the condition of judgments. This is the
determination of the subject in a categorical judgment,which [determination] contains the ground of truth. E.g., if I say that a man is deserving of
punishment, then I see that this does not apply to the concept of man
without condition. If I say, however, that a man who is vicious is deserving
of punishment, then the viciousness is the determination of the subject.
Actually this does not belong in logic, because logic does not occupy itself
at all with content. - Analysis of the judgment consists in passing judgment on the judgment in accordance with the 3 modijudicandi. In earlier
times one demanded these in the schools when one asked: quae, qualis,
quanta?
According to the relation of judgments, all judgments are categorical or
hypothetical or disjunctive. The matter of all categorical propositions consists of a concept, in which the concept of the subject belongs to the
concept of the predicate. E.g., Man is mortal[;] the subject, man, belongs
to the concept of the predicate, to be mortal. —In the case of hypothetical
judgments the matter for the concept consists of two judgments. E.g., If
God is just, evil is punished. Through zpropositio hypothetica I want to say
just that if the one is accepted, the other must also be accepted. One
judgment holds under the condition of the other. - Propositiones disjunctivae, as to their matter, are two or more judgments which are always
considered in opposition, and concerning which I represent that when
they are taken together, these judgments constitute everything that can be
said of the judgment. If one of them is true, then all the others' are false. If
933 all but one are false, then the one must be true. For because everything
that can be thought is thought, and all the remaining ones are false, this
one must be true. The matter of disjunctive judgments is various judgments, then, which are considered in opposition, however, so that all the
judgments taken together constitute the whole judgment. We see that they
k What, of what quality, and of what quantity, is the proposition?
' Reading "alle anderen" for"alle."
372THE V I E N N A LOGIC
constitute merely a logical division. For if I say, e.g., that all triangles are
either isosceles or equilateral or scalene,"1 then the triangle is divided into
as many members as it actually can be.
In the case of judgments, the form of the relation is that either the
relation of a subject with the predicate is considered, or that of a ground
with the consequence, or the relation of two or more judgments insofar as
they fill up the sphaera of a concept disjunctive^. —Categorical judgments
constitute the basisL of all the remaining ones. Here the relation of subject
with predicate is indicated. The hypothetical judgment is composed of
two problematic ones; the disjunctive judgment, however, is composed of
two or more judgments. In the hypothetical judgment I consider the
combination of two judgments as ground and consequence. In the disjunctive judgment all the categorical judgments are members of the division[;]
it is to be noted, however, that in the case of hypothetical and disjunctive
judgments, the judgments cannot be transformed into categorical judgments again. - The matter of a categorical judgment consists of two concepts, the form in the relation in which the one concerns the subject, the
other the predicate. E.g., Allmen are mortal. - In the hypothetical judgment the matter consists of two judgments. E.g., If the soul is corporeal,
then there is no hope of the necessity of another life. The «/expresses the
relation. If a judgment is thought without saying what is true and not true,
then this is a problematic judgment, which is accepted in order to see
whether the other judgment follows if I accept this one. It is thought
merely as to its possibility. I see only whether the judgment is possible,
even if the thing itself is not possible, since on all sides men have hit upon
strange propositions and have maintained them.
This is a judgment, then, that I do not regard as true as to modality, and
it is called problematic. I say that there is no other life[;] I will merely
think this in order to see how the proposition that I think would stand in
connection with another one. The matter of hypothetical judgments consists of two propositions, then. Now I say that with these propositions 934
things may be as they will, nonetheless, this much is certain, that if I
accept that the soul is corporeal, then I cannot possibly say that it is
immortal. In all hypothetical judgments there are two judgments which
are thought problematically not assertorically, and which constitute the
relation of a concept as ground to consequence. - Otherwise, the author
says, things are said in the schools per thesin, i.e., assertorically, or per
hypothesin, i.e. problematically. Per thesin means to say something categorically, per hypothesin to say something problematically, where the propositions are categorical, however, to the extent that the relation and the nexusL
of the ground with the consequence is indicated. In all hypothetical judgments there are two problematic judgments. The form of these judgments
™ Reading "ungleichseitig" for "gleichwinklich."
373
consists in the consequentia, according to which the one judgment is the
consequence of the other. The ground in the hypothetical judgment is
called the antecedent, the consequence is called the consequens[\\ consequently the matter of hypothetical judgments consists of the antecedent and
the consequens[\] the form, on the other hand, is the consequentia, i.e.,
what we deduce from the other.
It is good if we always have quite unique words for our concepts and do
not need to make do with paraphrases. Thus judgment and proposition are
actually distinct as to usage. When the logici say, however, that a proposition is a judgment clothed in words," that means nothing, and this definition is worth nothing at all. For how will they be able to think judgments
without words? Thus we prefer to say that a judgment considers the
relation of two concepts insofar as it is problematic, while by propositions
we understand an assertoric judgment. In judgment I test my proposition;
I judge before I maintain. In the case of a proposition, however, I posit
and I assert something, and the proposition consists in just this assertion[.] Hence we maintain that the consequentia of hypothetical propositions is called a proposition, because this deduction is certain and consequently is a positing.'
Some are of the opinion that we can transform hypothetical propositions into categorical propositions. One can do it. But what is maintained
is no longer the same, then. This is to remove the hypothetical proposition
and to put another in its place. It does seem to be the same if I say, All
men are mortal, or, If something is a man, then it is mortal. But they are
different. For in the second judgment it is problematic whether something
is mortal. Being mortal is not maintained categorically but holds only
when being man holds. Consequently it is completely different with cate-
935 gorical propositions than with hypothetical ones. In a hypothetical proposition it is not maintained at all that something is, but that it is if something,
namely, the ground, is accepted.
In the case of categorical propositions, however, there is no settled
condition. They are judgments essentially distinct from one another, then.
With all hypothetical judgments I have two modi, a modus ponens et
to Hens. The modus ponens is that if the antecedens is true, the consequens is
also true. The modus tollens is that if the consequens is false, the antecedens is
also false. This will come up later in syllogistic.
The disjunctive judgment contains the relation of different judgments
insofar as they are equal, as membra dividentia, to the sphaera of a cognitio
divisa. E.g., All triangles, as to their angles, are either right-angled or
acute or obtuse. —I represent the different members as they are opposed
to one another and as, taken together, they constitute the whole sphaera of
" Reading "ein Satz ist ein Unheil" for "ein Urtheil ist ein Satz."
* "eine position."
374
the cognitio divisa. This is in fact nothing other than a logical division, only
in the division there does not need to be a conceptus divisus;p instead, it can
be a cognitio divisa.9 E.g., If this is not the best world, then God was not
able or did not want to create a better one. This is the division of the
sphaera of the cognition that is given to me. These are problematic judgments, of which it is said assertorically, however, that taken together they
constitute the sphaera of the concept.
As for what concerns the modality of judgments, the ancients did not
take the division as exactly as we do; instead they called every combination
word modality. E.g., the world exists in a necessary way/ For them, the
word in a necessary way was the modality. But can logic really judge
whether a thing is necessary or not? No, for it has nothing to do with
things and their necessity. Hence it can only ask whether a judgment is
expressed with necessity or not. I ask only about the necessity that is to be
met with in judgment. If the possibility is determined on the basis of the
form, then it is a problematic judgment. If the possibility is actually diere,
then it is an assertoric judgment. And if it is combined with necessity, then
it is an apodeictic judgment. An assertoric judgment can be merely contingently true or apodeictically true. The contingently true are empirical
propositions. For experience only shows me how it is, but not that it must 936
be so. Apodeictic propositions, however, are propositions apriori,where at
the same time I cognize the necessity of the propositions. J udid a
exponibilia. E.g., if I say, A few' men are learned, then I can derive from
this (i.) Some men are learned. For a few are some, of course. (2.) Many
men are not learned, for a few is the opposite of many. These two propositions are included in the one proposition, which contains an affirmation
and a negation, but expressed in the form of affirmation. These are
exponible judgments.
Judgment can involve something that is not logical, but rather something that is aesthetical. A judgment is (i.) something logical that concerns the understanding. (2.) something sensible that concerns the senses.
E.g., if I say that virtue's worth is greatest, that is logical[;] but [if I say
that] virtue's worth exceeds everything to the point of astonishment, or if I
add an Oh! or an Ah! then these additions are something aesthetic in the
judgment. It would look quite ridiculous if someone wanted to bring in
aesthetics in mathematics. In just the same way, someone who wanted to
bring sarcasm into philosophy would not be writing purely logically, but
aesthetically, too. One must distinguish these well and not confuse them.
For the impression of the aesthetic often makes someone blind in regard
to the logical. When the talk is about the truth of the matter, then everyp divided concept.
* divided cognition.
"die Welt ist nothwendiger Weise da."
1 Reading "wenige Menschen" for "wenn wenige Menschen."
375
thing that excites the affects must be left out. One leaves this to those who
want to win approval surreptitiously by means of beautifully turned expressions, and not through grounds.
Practical judgments contain an ought, the necessity of why something
happens for some purpose or other. Theoretical judgments contain an is or
an is not[;] I say whether they are or are not in a certain respect. A
judgment that is capable of a proof is provable, demonstrable. One that is
not capable of any proof is an unprovable judgment. Among alljudgments
there must be some that are not capable of any proof and are immediately
certain, i.e., are unprovable propositions. Those that still need a proof,
however, are provable. - However many propositions there maybe that
are mediately certain, there must in the end be some that are immediately
certain. E.g., between twopoints I can draw only one straight line. -
Empty judgments. Among those that are immediately certain, some rest
on identity, e.g., every body is extended. If I develop the concept of a body,
937 I find that I think the concept of extension in it. Here there is an identity
of body and extension, then. For impenetrable extension is a part of the
concept of body and lies in it. -
If the identity is explicita,' then such an analytic proposition, which
rests on identity, is a tautological proposition. E.g., man is man. If I say,
however, that man is a rational being, then the concept is the same
implicite. Every proposition that is identical implicite is provable. For it
can be developed in accordance with its parts. If a proposition is identical
explidte, however, then it is wholly indemonstrable. Such a proposition can
be called an empty proposition, e.g., Every body is corporeal. Propositions, on the other hand, that are identical implicite, are not empty propositions. For through them a mark that lay hidden is made clear. E.g., All
bodies are extended. Here I need only make the identity distinct per
analysin, and I see that it lies therein not tautologically but mediately. - It
is false, however, and unworthy of so great a man, when the author says
that all our cognitions of reason rest in the end on empty propositions. For
then they would rest on nothing. No, they rest on propositions that are
true but are identical implicite, and a large part rests on analysis, in accordance with which I have insight into the relation between subject and
predicate. Propositions that are empty of sense are called empty, but so
are those that arefruitless and without use. Identically tautological propositions are not empty of sense, but fruitless. All judgments serve only to give
distinct concepts of things. E.g., Every man is a rational being. This is a
distinct concept of man. Here I have made clear a mark of the concept,
i.e., I have made it clear through its predicate^] I have judged. Consequently we cannot have any clear marks except through a categorical
judgment, and consequently judgments serve for attaining distinct con-
' Reading "explicita" for"explicata."
376
cepts. A judgment that does not produce a distinct concept is empty,
however. It is not empty of meaning, but logically empty. Through them
nothing useful is attained, because they do not yield a distinct concept,
and do not fulfill the understanding's ends. Battology is similar to tautology[; it] is the vain" use of many words, where the concept. .. with many
words . . .
[Translator's Note: The MS of the Vienna Logic breaks off at this point. It resumes
in a different hand and in a very abbreviated style, continuing thus for another
three pages (24:937-940). Because these last three pages are so difficult to interpret, they are not translated here. Instead, the corresponding section of the Hechsel
Logic, which presumably contains what is missing from the Vienna Logic, appears
next. 1
377The Hechsei logic[Translator's Note: As noted in the Translator's Introduction, the latter half of the
Hechsel Logic appears to have been identical with the latter half of the Vienna Logic.
I translate a portion of the Hechsel Logic here to replace what is missing from the
Vienna Logic. The translation begins on p. 86 of the Hechsel manuscript, three
sentences before the point at which the translation of the Vienna Logic ends.]
. . . A judgment that does not produce a distinct concept is empty, however. It is not empty of sense, but logically empty. Through them nothing
useful is attained because they do not yield a distinct concept, and do not
fulfill the understanding's ends. Battology" (which has similarity with tautology) is the vain"7 use of many words, where the concept is said with
many words, without these many words making the concept distinct. It 87
gets its name from a certain Batto,1 who observed1 the opposite of laconism, and who exerted himself to combine many words with few
thoughts. Tautology consists in identitas explidta.
We are speaking of mediately and immediately^ certain judgments. An
unprovable judgment that is not capable of further proof is immediately
certain. One that it is still possible to prove in speculation is mediate.
Proof is mediate certainty of cognition by means of another cognition.
That every body is extended2 no man can prove. This is an elementary
proposition of a cognition, from which all other proofs are derived. These
are either analyticallyunprovable or they are immediately certain propositions that are synthetic[.] E.g.: between 2 points only one straight line can
be drawn. Synthetic propositions, then, are ones where I add one concept
to another immediately. All immediately certain propositions a priori can
be called principles. We can also have immediately certain propositions a
posteriori. E.g.: This tree is made of wood[;]fl propositions that are immediately certain a posteriori are called propositions of experience. Principles
need no proof because they are cognized* a priori and do not rest on
1 Reading "Battologie" for "Bathologie," with Finder.
" Reading "unnütze"for "nützliche," with Finder.
' Reading "beobachtete"for "beobachtet."
3 Reading"unmittelbar" for "untelbar," with Finder.
* Reading "ausgedehnt" for "ausgelehrt," with Finder.
" Reading "Dieser Baum ist aus Holtz" for "Dieser Baum, dieses Holtz," with Finder.
* Reading "erkannt" for "erlernt," with Finder.
381
experience. They are called principles because' they are not grounded in
turn on others but instead provide the ground for others. They are also
called prima prindpia because one cannot subordinate them to any other,
and are cognitions such that all others are subordinated to them/ Principles are of 2 kinds, intuitive and discursive principles. An intuitive principle is called an axioma. There is no word in philosophy for discursive
principles, because no one has ever made the distinction between intuitive
and discursive principles. One could call it an acroama, however, a proposition'' that can be expressed only through words and through pureuniversal
concepts. An axioma, however, can only be exhibited in intuition. There
are theoretical and practical principles. A postulate is a proposition in
which is said what must happen when I act with respect to a given cognition. It is a representation of the nature-^of an action in such a way that it is
thereby presupposed that it is immediately certain, that it can be shown/
E.g.: [T]o draw a straight line. When one does not know immediatelyhow
the action is to be completed then this is a problem. E.g.: To have a
perpendicular line fall on a point.
Judgments of experience are such insofar as they are given only a posteriori
and we judge without proof. E.g. To judge that a body is heavy. An
immediate judgment of perception is when . . . 2
One must note how cognitions are combined in a system and how they
fit together as members in accordance with the idea of a whole. In the case
of an aggregate the concept of the parts is prior to the whole and hence
one can say that every system has an arrangement of members where one
part is always there for the sake of the other, and they are all related to the
idea of the whole, as, e.g., the parts of an animal are[;] and [the parts]
cannot be be increased at all, as happens in the case of a tree with its
88 branches, which on that account are not members of the tree, either, but
rather parts. We will not call them merely parts then, either, but rather
members. In a system the members have various names, in accordance
with what their use is, and, indeed, in respect of their principal and
secondary purposes in the system. What concerns the principal purposes
are the definitions, the axiomataL, which all relate to the principal purpose.
Membra principaliah also include theoremata, i.e., theoretical judgments
insofar as they are capable of a proof, and problemata[,] practical propositions which require a solution. When I have to show how it is possible to
' Reading "Grundsäzze, weil sie" for "Grundsäzze, nicht, weil sie," with Finder.
4 Reading "denen alle ändern subordinirt werden" for "die allen ändern subordirt
werden," with Finder. ;
' Reading "Mann könte ihn aber acroama nenen, einSatz . . ." for"Mann könte ihnaber)
nennen, acroama ein Satz ..." '••
f "Art."
8 "praestiret werden."
* Reading "principalia" for "principiorum," with Finder.
382
accomplish something, and have to prove that it has been accomplished in
this way.
kproblema needs first of all a proposition that represents the action that
is to occur. E.g., when I ask to have a perpendicular line fall on a point,
andly there is the question of how it is to be proved[;] and then it must be
proved that if I represent it as I have represented it, then I would' determine what the questio problematic says.
Included among the principiae minores siue deriuatiuaej which concern
the secondary purpose of the system, are* the corollaria. They are consequences of an axioma [or] theorema which are regarded not as principles
but rather as prindpia pertinentes res.1 They are not the basic parts themselves, but they still belong along with these. Corollaria are immediate
deductions from the preceding propositions, and they are distinct from
theorems in that they are inferred immediately from the preceding propositions. Theoremata, on the other hand, are drawn from a given judgment
through a series of deductions. Corollaria, however, are immediate inferences from preceding propositions.
Scholia^ are really notprincipia of a system but parts that are added to
it, not in order to settle something, but rather to make the thing interesting and to embellish it. They tell the history of the proposition, mention
examples, resolve scruples, and are concerned solely with secondary
things, which do not extend the system, but rather its usefulness.
Now our author makes use of various expressions and says a lot that
sounds great as it is proclaimed, but that does not develop the concept
further. Thus he speaks, e.g., of how a problem is to be resolved and says:
When the problem is given to you, seek all the possible actions through
which it can be resolved, and then give a proof that the quaesitum has
come about. One will become aware"1 of many delusions of this kind which
prevail in many sciences, but which do not have the success that they
promise. If culture did not refine man then we would see that most
moralists and preachers have produced nothing better. Not because morals is not in a position to do this, but because they present nothing but
tautologies and produce a lot of hot air, concerning what man already
knows better by himself.
Of Inferences of the Understanding. If I am to deduce" one judgment from
another, this is an inference. There are mediate and immediate inferences.
A mediate inference is when, besides the concepts that are contained in 89
Reading "würde" for "wurde."
1 principles that are minor or derivative (reading "principalibus minoribus siue
deriuatiuis" for "principiis minus deriuatuis").
* Reading "des systems gehen, gehören" for "des systems gehören," with Finder.
' things pertaining to the principles.
Reading "gewahr werden" for "gewant werden," with Finder.
" Reading "folgern" for "folgen."
383
the judgment, I need still other concepts" that are not contained in the
judgment in order top derive a cognition. E.g., All bodies are divisible
because diey are composite. Here the inference will run thus: everything
composite is divisible, consequently all bodies are divisible.* Here we
need a third concept, namely, being composite/ in order to deduce from
this that bodies are divisible. This is consequently a mediate5 inference,
then, when a third concept is sought out in order to draw a consequence
from the judgment. If I say, however, All bodies are divisible, consequently some bodies are divisible, then these judgments are the same as to
matter and they do not contain more than 2 concepts[;] such a deduction
is called a consequentia immediata, an immediate inference. An immediate
inference follows from the other [judgment] in such a way that it is
distinct from the other only as to form[.] E.g., All men are mortal. Here I
can infer immediately[,] merely as to form[,] Some mortal things are men,
or consequently, No man is immortal. Such a deduction[,] where the
conclusio differs from the iudicium concludens only as to form, is a consequentia immediata. One could also call it an inference of the understanding, in order to distinguish it from a ratiocinium, or an inference of reason.
Where I need a iudicum intermedium,'because the one judgmentis distinct
from the other" materialiter[.] E.g., All men are mortal, consequently
Cajus is mortal. Men[,] mortal constitute the matter of the first judgment.
The judgment inferred from this is distinct from it as to matter, for Cajus
does not occur in the concept of all men. Where 2 judgmentsare distinct
as to matter, then, one cannot infer immediately;1 radier, this is a mediate
inference" or an inference of reason. Consequently immediate inferences*
are essentially distinct from inferences of reason as consequentia mediata.y I
can infer one judgment from the odier immediately when it is not distinct2
as to matter but rather as to form. They must be distinct as to sense,
however, not merely as to expression, for I cannot derive idem ex eodem."
Consequentiae immediataeb are divided into those where" the consequentia
° Reading "Begriffe" for "Urtheile."
f Reading "urn" for "und," with Finder.
* Reading "teilbar, folglich sind alle Körper teilbar" for "theilbar," with Finder.
' Reading "das zusammengesetzt seyn" for "das zusammengesetzt sey," with Finder.
' Reading "mittelbarer" for"unmittelbarer," with Finder.
' Reading "iudicium intermedium" for "iudicium," with Finder.
* Reading "vom anderen" for "von anderen," with Finder.
1 Reading "da nicht schließen" for "dar nicht schließen," with Finder.
" Reading "mittelbarer" for "mittelbar," with Finder.
* Reading "sind die unmittelbaren Schüße" for "sind da die unmittelbaren Schüße," with
Finder.
* Reading "consequentiis median's" for "iudiciis mediis," with Finder.
z Reading "nicht unterschieden" for "noch nicht unterschieden," with Finder.
" the same from the same (reading "ex" for "per," with Finder).
* Reading "consequentiae immediatae" for "judicia immediata," with Finder.
' Reading "solche, da die" for"solche die, die," with Finder.
384
is derived per iudida aequipollentia, or per iudicia subalternata,d or indicia
opposita, or per conversionem iudidorum, or per contrapositionem.'
1. [An inference] per iudicia aequipollentia, as has already been mentioned, is really not an inference, for per aequipollentia I infer one judgment from another that is identical with it. They are distinct merely as to
expression, but not as to sense. In logic, however, one holds to sense, not
to wordsf.] E.g., if I say[,] Some men are not virtuous, consequently not all
men are virtuous/ then this is not distinct as to sense. Rather, [it is] only
expressed differently, and as to sense the very same thing [is] said. Nothing is without a ground, consequently everything has a ground. These are
not really immediate* deductions, but mere substitutions. I can substitute
one of these iudicia in place of the other. The first division drops out,
then, but one must still be able to name it.
2. Perjudicia subalternata.h Here, too, the matters are not distinct. In the
case of [iudicia] subalternata,' however, the form concerns the quantity[.]
E.g., All men are mortal, consequently some are mortal. The matter is the 90
same but the quantity is distinct, for from the universaljudgment a particular judgment is made. From the universal flows the particular, for if all
men are mortal, then some men are so too.
3. A consequentia immediata' isper iudicia opposita when, from a judgment
with the same matter, difference of form as to qualityis expressed. E.g., All
men are mortal, some men are not mortal/ The 2nd judgment is distinct
from the ist as to quantity, istly (for it is particular), as to quality, 2ndly(for
it is negative). Or, e.g., some men are learned, some not. These 2 are
distinct merely as to quality,' for the one is affirmative, the other is negative [;] hence they are called iudida opposita, too, because affirmation and
denial are opposed to one another. Iudicia opposita are opposita in 3 ways,
namely, contradictorie opposita, subcontrarie opposita, and contrarie opposita.
2 judgments are opposed (i.) contradictorie, then, when one affirms
universally and the other denies1" particularly.3 Wherever one of them is
universal, the other particular, and wherever one is always affirmative, the
other is always negative. E.g., All men are mortal, some [are] not. The
oppositio contradictoria" is the kind that can be called genuine opposition."
d Reading "subalternata" for "subaltera," with Finder.
Reading "contrapositionem" for "contraoppositionem," with Finder.
f Reading "Menschen sind tugendhaft, so" for "Menschen, so," with Finder.
1 Reading "unmittelbare" for "untelbare," with Finder.
* Reading "subalternata" for "subalterna," with Finder.
Reading "subalternatis" for "subalternis," with Finder.
; Reading "immediata" for"mediate," with Finder.
Reading "sterblich, einige Menschen sind nicht sterblich." for "sterblich.," with Finder.
Reading "Qualitaet" for "Quantitaet," with Finder.
" Reading "verneinet" for "verneinend."
Reading "oppositio contradictoria" for "compositio contradicitoria," with Finder.
' Reading "Opposition" for"contradiction," with Finder.
385I M M A N U E L KANT
For every opposition actually requires that when the one is posited, the
other is removed, that both cannot at the same time be denied/ nor both
at the same time affirmed. The positing of the one always excludes the
other. Affirmando unum, negat alterum, et negando unum, affirmat altemm.q
One must attend to this: What do I saywhen I affirm universally? That the
thing holds of all. If someone wants to dispute this, then he has to say that
this does not belong to all but rather to some[;] consequently he contradicts the universal negation by means of the particular affirmation, and he
contradicts the universal affirmation by means of the particular negation,
which constitutes true opposition. Thus if the one is true, the other is
false[;] both cannot be true at the same time. If the one is false, then the
other is true[;] both cannot be false at the same time. Apagogical proofs
are ones where I infer from the falsehood of the opposite' to the truth of
my proposition. Because in 2 contmdictorie opposita, when the one is false,
the other is true, they have the advantage* of proving the truth indirecte. In
this connection, however, one must see that the propositions are actually'
opposita, for in metaphysics one can prove very many propositions if it is a
matter of showing that the opposite is false, because one can always draw
a lot of absurdity from the opposite of a proposition. One thereby makes
use of the absurdity of the opposite in order to put forward" the other
91 proposition, although one really cannot prove it1 direäe. Everyone triumphs, in that he has proved his proposition by having refuted the other
one. This comes from the fact that propositions are held to be contradictory whose contradiction0' is only illusory, and concerning which one is not
certain. Nonetheless, one can use this means of inferring that contradictory propositions provide.
2. Subcontrarie opposita are found between 2 particular propositions
that are the same as to matter. E.g., some men are learned, some not.
They are not opposed to one another in the strict sense, however, and this
does not occur in the case of true* oppositions. They are said to be
opposed to one another, however, because they are opposed as to quality,
although they agree as to quantity. Why can I not infer here that if the one
is true/ the other is false?2 Because they are not opposed to one another
p Reading "verneint" for "verneinend," with Finder.
* Affirming the one negates the other, negating the one affirms the other (reading "negat"
for "nega" and "affirmat" for "affirma," with Finder).
' "des entgegen gesezten oppositi."
* Reading "den VortheiP for "die Vortheile," with Finder.
' Reading "wirklich" for "wilkiirlich," with Finder.
" "stoßen."
1 Reading "ihn" for "sie."
* Reading "Contradiction" for "contradictionen," with Finder.
' Reading "wahren" for"stricten," with Finder.
' Reading "wahr" for"falsch," with Finder.
* Reading "falsch" for "wahr," with Finder.
386
striae, in such a way that the one denies exactlywhat the other affirms. For
if I say of a few that they are learned, then I have not said this same thing
of the few of whom I say that they are unlearned, [not] of all, but rather
only of the few, of whom I say that they are learned"[,] only of a few.
Accordingly, I simply cannot infer from the truth* of the one to the
falsehood' of the other per subcontrarie opposita. Both cannot at the same
time''be false, however; for if the one is false, that some men are learned,
then the other must be true, that some are not learned. Both cannot be
false, but both can well be true. Because both can be true, then, nothing
can be inferred therefrom. I can of course infer that if the one is false, the
other is true, but not that if the one is true, the other is false.
3. In the case of a iudidum contrarie oppositum, the opposition is universal, and the one judidum affirmative, the 2nd negative. The matter remains the same, however, as usual. E.g., All men are learned, no man is
learned. These two judgments can both be false, because each judgment
says more than is required for opposition. Of the proposition, All men are
learned, the opposition is, Some men are not learned. He who says, then,
No man is learned, says more than he should oppose, this is the source of
the imperfection. Thus I can infer that both cannot possibly be true, but
both can be false. The propositions are thus the opposite of the subcontrarie opposita[.]
4. Per conversionem iudiciorum. This consequential immediata concerns the relation of judgments. I infer from a iudidum conversum' its
iudidum convertens^ if, while preserving the concepts, I infer from a judgment in such a way that what was the subject in the judidum conversum1
becomes the predicate here.4 E.g., Allmen are mortal, consequently some
mortals are men. All conversio is either conversio simplidter talis or per
acddens.h In the case of conversion, the iudidum is not altered' as to quality,
and as the conversum* is, so must the convertensk be, too. It can be altered
merely as to quantity and relation, then. In conversions, then, the differences are that the convertens1 is the same as or different from the conversum" 92
Reading "gelehrt" for "ungelehrt."
Reading "Wahrheit" for "Falschheit," with Finder.
Reading "Falschheit" for "Wahrheit," with Finder.
Reading "nicht zugleich" for "nicht aber zugleich," with Finder.
Reading "converse" for "convertente," with Finder.
Reading "convertens" for "conversum," with Finder.
Reading "converse" for "convertente," with Finder.
conversion such that it is simple [or] by accident.
Reading "nicht verändert" for "verändert," with Finder.
Reading "conversum" for "convertens," with Finder.
Reading "convertens" for "conversum," with Finder.
Reading "convertens" for "conversum," with Finder.
Reading "converse" for "convene," with Finder.
387
as to quantity."E.g., if it is different, then it is a conversioper accidens[;] but if
the quantity" remains, so that, e.g., from one universal judgment another
universal is converted, then it is conversio simpliciter talis[;] e.g., All men are
mortal, consequently some mortals are men. Here the quantity'1is different,
hence it is a conversio per accidens. But this: No man is without enemies,
consequently nothing without enemies is a man, is then simpliciter talis.
Universal affirmative* propositions may never be converted' except per
acädens. A universal negative judgmentmay always be converted simpliciter,
howeverf;] e.g., All men are mortal[;] here I do not infer, consequently all
mortals are men, but rather some mortals are men, and this because the
subject is always contained under the sphere1 of the predicate. In universal
affirmative judgments, accordingly, the subject is a part of the sphere of the
predicate^] consequently I will say: the concept of men belongs only to
some mortals, because only a part of the sphere of the predicate lies in the
subject[;] consequently I can only convertper accident here. Universal negative' judgments are converted simpliciter[;] because 2 concepts contradict
one another in the whole extension, b contradicts a, as well as"a contradicts
b. All particular judgments may be converted simpliciter, be they affirmative
or negative[.] E.g., Some men are learned, consequently some learned
beings are men, in which case they remain the same in sense.
5-/n the case of the consequentia immediata per contra positionem,
as in that of1 conversion, a metathesis terminorum" is performed,but in such
a way' that the quality is also altered at the same time/ All universal
affirmative judgments may be contraposed. All men are mortal, nothing
that is not mortal is a man.
We find, then, that in the case of the consequentia immediata, the alteration concerns only the form, and that quoad qualitatenf there are the
indicia opposita, quoad relationem" there is conversio. Contraposition concerns merely the modality of judgments, for it indicates nothing but the
necessity of an affirmative judgment. If I have maintained a proposition as
" Reading "Quantitaet" for "Qualitaet," with Finder.
8 Reading "quantitaet" for "qualitaet," with Finder.
* Reading "Quantitaet" for "Qualitaet," with Finder.
* Reading "bejahende" for "besondre," with Finder.
' Reading "umkehren" for "umdrehen."
1 Reading "der Sphäre" for "den Spaehren," with Finder.
' Reading "Allgemein verneinende" for"Verneinde."
" Reading "sowohl" for "wohl," with Finder.
' Reading "wie bei" for "außer," with Finder.
* transposition of terms.
* Reading "vorgenommen, aber so" for "vorgenommen, so," with Finder.
' Omitting "ZE: Alle Menschen sind sterblich, also einiges nicht sterbliches ist kein
Mensch.," with Finder.
* as to quality.
" as to relation.
388
true, then through contraposition I make it undeniable/ in that I say,
because it is true, it is thus undeniable/ E.g., if the proposition, All men
are mortal, is to express necessity, then one would have to say, What is not
mortal is not a man. Here one sees how nicely it is confirmed that these 4
functions of the understanding manifest themselves in the 4 kinds of
alterations'' of judgment, and one sees at the same time how nicely the
ancients, in this division, have exhausted' all the actus of the understanding that occur in the possible alterations of judgments.
All consequentiae immediatae havethe peculiaritythat in them no subsumption under universal rules can occur except what would be^ tautological.
Because, however/ every tautological proposition would be empty, one 93
simply omits it. E.g., All men are mortal, some men are men, hence some
men are mortal.* On account of this, many logicians also saythat immediate
inferences are all short inferences of reason[;] they really are not, however,
because a tautological subsumption is not a true subsumption.
Of Inferences ofReason[.] An inference of the understanding was' not
inferred per notam intermedium, because the alteration lay only in form, the
matter remained' the same. If I say, however, All men are mortal, consequently Cajus is mortal, then here a wholly new concept appears, which is
not contained in the first judgment at all. Here I see, then, that I must
have an intermediate judgment in order to be able to say that Cajus is
mortal. I must presuppose, namely, that Cajus is a man. Cajus must lie
under the principal concept of men, then, for otherwise I could not infer:
hence Cajus is mortal[;] Cajus is a man* is the intermediate judgment and
contains what must be cognized per consequentiam mediatem.' An inference
of reason, or™ a mediate inference, is where one judgment is combined
with the other by means of an intermediate judgment; or an inference of
reason is the truth of a judgment through the subsumption of its condition
under universal rules[.]" The concept of man must lie at the basis in the
* Reading "unleugbar" for "umlechtbar," with Finder.
' Reading "unleugbar" for"umlechtbar," with Finder.
Reading "4 Arten von Veränderungen"for "4 Arten, und bey den Veränderungen," with
Finder.
Reading "erschöpft" for "geschöpft," with Finder.
Reading "würde" for "würden," with Finder.
8 Reading "Weil aber" for "Weil also," with Finder.
Reading "Alle Menschen sind sterblich, einige Menschen sind Menschen," for "Alle
Menschen sind sterblich," in accordance with Finder's suggestion.
Reading "wurde" for "würde," with Finder.
1 Reading "blieb" for "bleibe," with Finder.
Reading "Cajus is sterblich, Cajus ist ein Mensh" for "Cajus ist ein Mensch," with
Finder.
' Reading "mediatem" for"immediatem," with Finder.
Reading "oder" for "denn," with Finder.
" Reading "allgemeinen Regel" for "ändern Urteil," with Finder.
389
case of Cajus, for if this does not lie at the basis, then I cannot say of Cajus
that the truth holds of him as of other men.
In the case of inferences of reason, then, there occurs (i.) A rule, or the
majorL; sometimes, when it is the highest rule, it is called a maxima, or the
rule of actionf;] hence we can call every little rule a majorL, and consequently this name from the ancient logicians is quite suitable. We can
infer another judgment from the rule even without subsumption, and this
occurs in the consequentia immediata. (2.) The minor propositio is the
subsumption of the cognition under the condition of the rule. Every rule
has its condition, under which it can be affirmed or denied. Here the
condition of man is affirmed through" Cajus. If something is subsumed
under a condition, then this is as much as to say that the predicate of the
subsumption appliesf;]^ to subsume means to cognize that something is
contained under the condition of the rule. (3.) The proposition where the
predicate of the rule is either affirmed or denied of the subsumption is the
conclusion, the inference. Every inference of reason has two premises and
a conclusion, then. The conclusion' is the proposition that is to be inferred from the first ones/ An inference of reason also has 2 premises,
however, because istly there is a rule (w<z/orL)[;] then I must1 also subsume
under the condition of the rule, however, in that I say of what I have
subsumed thereunder the very same thing that the rule says universallyof
its condition.'
The conclusion actually does not constitute a part of the inference, for
if something follows from two given things, that which follows may not be
taken as a part along with them; thus, e.g., if marks already suffice for a
definition, then we may not cite the deduction from the marks. In an
94 inference of reason the conclusion is given just as soon as the consequentia
from the premises is given. Thus we have only to weigh the truth of the
two premises and the correctness of the consequentia. The truth of the two
premises does not constitute the truth of the conclusion;" only the correctness of the consequentia from the premises does. All men are animals, All
oxen are animals, are true premises, only the conclusion, All men are
oxen, is nonetheless false. When, however, I have nothing to object to in
either, then there is nothing more to object.1' In an inference of reason one
must not deny the conclusion, then, but one must reject either one of the
premises or the consequentia from the concepts, i.e., he must say that what
" Reading "durch" for "wer," with Finder.
f Reading "körnt dazu" for "komt der Regel zu."
* Reading "Conclusion. Die Conclusion ist" for "Conclusion ist," with Finder.
' Reading "den ersten" for"der ersten," with Finder.
5 Reading "ist (maior), dann muß" for "ist, den Major muß," with Finder.
' Reading "ihrer Bedingung" for "ihren Bedingungen," with Finder.
" Reading "Conclusion" for "Consequentz," with Finder.
1 Reading "einzuwenden" for "zu erinnern."
390
is derived from the premises'" does not follow. The matter of inferences of
reason is the premises, the form is the consequential
Here we must recall that the matter of a categorical proposition consists
of two concepts/ the matter of a hypothetical judgment of 2 or more
propositions. The matter of an inference of reason consists of 2 judgments, however. Now if we want to divide inferences of reason, we cannot
divide them as to quantity2 into universal and particular inferences, for the
major is only universal, in accordance with a special rule. The conclusion
may be a universal"or a particular proposition, for nothing depends on the
conclusion; rather, it depends on the way in which the consequentia of one
judgment is drawn from another. There is no difference among inferences, furthermore, as to whether they are distinct as to quality, are
affirmative or negative. They are not divided as to modality, either, into
problematic, assertoric, and apodeictic propositions, because all inferences of reason have an apodeictic proposition as conclusion. For if I
bring something forth through an inference of reason, then it is on that
account necessary. Propositions can be true but contingently*true. E.g.,
that men in Africa are black is a true, contingent proposition, and it
cannot be an inference, and is therefore not necessary/ Since they contain
necessity, they are always apodeictic. Consequently inferences of reason
cannot be divided at all, or they must be divided according to the differing
relation of cognition, and they really are divided in accordance with this.
All inferences of reason are either categorical or hypothetical or disjunctive inferences of reason. A categorical inference of reason is one whose''
major propositio is a categorical proposition, i.e., where the relation of
subject to predicate is indicated. A hypothetical inference of reason is one
where the majorL is a hypothetical proposition, and which expresses the
relation of a ground to the consequence. A disjunctive inference of reason
is one where the major propositio is a disjunctive proposition, and expresses
the members of the division, which taken together constitute'' the cognition. The division rests on the relation that is found in the majorL, then.
Our author and all logicians talk as if all inferences of reason were categorical, or as if the majorL contained nothing more than the relation of 95
subject to predicate. This he calls an ordinary inference/ but the hypothetical and disjunctive inferences he calls extraordinary. But there is no
Reading "Praemissen" for "praecisen," with Finder.
Reading "Consequent" for "Conclusion," with Finder.
* Reading "Begriffen" for "Urtheilen," with Finder.
Reading "Quantitaet" for "Qualitaet," with Finder.
Reading "ein allgemeiner" for "einer allgemeinen," with Finder.
Reading "aber zufälliger Weise" for "oder gefälliger Weise," with Finder.
Reading "deshalb nicht nothwendig" for "deshalb nothwendig," with Finder.
Reading "dessen" for "der," with Finder.
Reading "ausmachen" for "ausmacht."
' Reading "Schluß" for"Schlüße," with Finder.
391
ground for this, for the last are just as ordinary as the categorical, since
they are a wholly different way of inferring.
Since our author regards categorical inferences of reason as the essential ones, then, he proceeds, and all other logicians with him/ in the
following way. In every categorical inference the majorL is a categorical
proposition. The minor propositio contains the subsumption of a concept
under the condition of the major propositio, and the conclusion says of what
I have subsumed in the minor what the rule says of the condition. In*
every inference of reason what matters is the truth of the conclusion. This
is a judgment that consists of two concepts. Now because the predicate
cannot be immediately cognized of the subject, a middle concept must be
involved. For if I say, Cajus is mortal, then I do not cognize immediately
that he is mortal; rather, a middle concept' is involved, to which mortality
belongs immediately,-' so that I regard mortality as a mark of Cajus. I infer,
then, Mortality belongs to man in general,* is a predicate of all men. To be
a man is a concept of Cajus[;] consequently Cajus is mortal. There arises
an inference of reason, then, since two notae remotae are combined
through a nota intermedia, or a medius terminus. Every inference of reason
involves 3 termini, then: subject, predicate, and nota intermedia or medius
terminus. The logicians have named these 3 termini differently[;] the predicate of the conclusion is called the terminus major, because every predicate
has a larger sphere than its subject. The subject of the conclusion is called
the terminus minor, on the ground that it is contained under the sphere of
the predicate^] and the nota intermedia is called the terminus medius.
Furthermore, the logicians say that in every inference of reason the first
proposition is called the majorL because the predicate of the conclusion is
contained in the first proposition. All men are mortal, and since the
subject of the conclusion is the terminus minor, one calls the 2nd premise
the propositio minor, because the terminus minor is contained therein.
These names' do not apply to all syllogisms, however, but only to categorical onesf;] they do not suit hypothetical ones, because there the propositio
major does not have 2 termini, but rather 2 iudicia[;] and in this way, then,
the hypothetical inference would not have a majorL. The majorL of a
hypothetical inference runs thus. E.g., If God is just, the persistently evil
96 will be punished. Here there are not 2 termini,but rather 2 propositions.
From this it follows that the logicians' definition of propositio major and
e Reading "ihm" for "ihne."
* Reading "habe, was die Regel von der Bedingung sagt. In" for "habe, die Bedingung
In," with Finder.
' Reading "Mittelbegrif" for "unmittelbarer Begrif."
' Reading "unmittelbar" for"auch," with Finder.
* Reading "komt dem Menschen überhaupt zu" for "komt dem Menschen Überhaupt zu
seyn," with Finder.
' Reading "Diese Benennungen gehen" for "Diese Benennung geht," with Finder.
392
minorL simply cannot be admitted, and that"1 what we have said is more
correct. The propositio major expresses a universal rule, the minorL subsumes under the condition of the rule," and the conclusion affirms or
denies the predicate of the rule. One can say, then, that even in" the
ratiocinium categoricum the judgment that isp compared with the medius
terminus is called the major propositio, because it happens that it* is always
the rule. Generaliter, then, the major propositio is the rule. The matter of all
inferences of reason is judgments, whose matter is concepts. In the categorical inference the matter consists of 3 concepts. In the hypothetical
inference even more concepts occur. E.g., If God is just, then the persistently Godless will be punished. Here there are 4 termini, and here there
is no division into majorL and minor terminus.
Does the conclusion also occur in the census^ of the matter? No, for if
the premises are correct, and the consequentia from them is inferred correctiy, then eo ipso it is true too. The truth is inferred from the premises,
consequently it is not the material of the inference but only the deduction
from the material. The matter consists of the two premises, then. The
conclusion is not a part but only a deduction therefrom. For if we want to
have constituent parts, then we do not want to have the consequences
therefrom. Besides the matter, the consequentia is to be taken into consideration. The correct consequentia from the premises constitutes the form of
the inference[;] on this account, one will never make an objection against
the conclusion in a disputation;' rather, when the opponent has expounded an inference, then the respondent must say, Syllogismus errat in
materia or in forma,1 because unless something is mistaken either in the
premises, i.e., in the matter, or in the consequentia, then the conclusion is
correct.
In regard to truth, the Syllogismus is divided into verus et erroneus sive
falsus.' A ratiocinium can be false, in such a way that the error lies either in
materia or in forma. Ratiocinium laborat vitio in materia" if one of the
premises is false, or it is false in forma if the consequentia is drawn falsely
from true premises.
Every ratiocinium is velpurum, vel hybridum, a pure inference, or a mixed
or bastard one. A ratiocinium hybridum is when, besides the 3 propositions
that constitute the inference, a further consequentia immediata is mixed in.
Reading "und daß" for "undaß," with Finder.
Reading "under der Bedingung der Regel" for "unter der Regel der Bedingung," with
Finder.
Reading "daß selbst in" for "daß die Ursach, weshalb selbst in," with Finder.
f Reading "das Unheil, das" for "das Unheil, das Urtheil, das," with Finder.
* Reading "es" for "er," with Finder.
Reading "Disputation"for "Disposition," with Finder.
The syllogism is wrong in matter [or] in form (reading "errat" for "erat," with Finder).
true, and erroneous or false.
" The inference suffers from an error in its matter.
393I M M A N U E L KANT
E.g., Every substance has11 a power to act. Every spirit is a substance,
97 consequently every spirit has a power to act, hence something that has a
power to act is a spirit. Here the last proposition is converted peracddens and
does not belong to the inference. Or one mixes something in in the middle.
E.g., No thinkingbeing is composite, consequently (consequentia immediate?)
nothing composite is a thinking being, atqui" all bodies are composite,
consequently no bodies are thinking beings. Here we have 4 propositions.
The 2nd proposition, which is the propositio convertens,' is actually the major^
here, because according to a special rule, the medius terminus in majori is not
the predicate, as in the ist proposition. I have taken a proposition, then, and
made of its convertensy the majorL, and from this composed the rest of the
inference. These would be 4 propositions, then, of which, however, no
ratiodnium can consist, and although the Syllogismus is correct as to content
and as to the consequentia, it is nonetheless not apurus, but rather a hybridus.
For inferences of the understanding or consequentiae immediatae are in fact
distinct from inferences of reason and are of a wholly different kind. This
division is especially needed, then, just because we will show subsequently
that all the artifice of the ancients with the 4 figures (excluding the first)
consists merelyin making ratiodnia hybrida, in that they falsely present as an
inference of reason what is produced through one or more consequentiae
immediatae, which are thought, however, only tacite.
The author speaks now of the principle of the principles of inferences
of reason, of the formal principles, of course, for the materialprindpium is
always the propositio major. He mentions in this connection the principle of
contradiction[;] this is to be regarded, of course, as the formal prindpium
of all cognition, but it comes under consideration in connection with
judgments and not with inferences, for it indicates that a predicate that
contradicts a thing cannot be attributed to it[;] it holds2 for propositions,
then, and not for inferences of reason. There are as many formal principia
of inferences of reason, then, as there are inferences of reason themselves. There are principles, accordingly,for categorical, hypothetical, and
disjunctive inferences.
The prindpium of all categorical inferences (or as the author says, of
ordinary inferences) is the dictum de omni et nullo, since I infer from the
universal to the particular. Basically, however, this is not the principle of
categorical, but also of all inferences of reason. For one can never infer
otherwise than from the universal to the particular. For an inference of
reason is the cognition of the truth of a cognition that stands under the
98 condition of a universal rule. If the condition of the rule occurs, then that
" Reading "hat" for "ist."
* but.
* Reading "propositio convertens" for "propositio conversa"; see MS pg. 91, above.
' Reading "convertens" for"conversum."
* Reading "gilt" for "gehört."
394
which stands under the condition of the rule must be just as true as what
the rule says of the condition. E.g., If God is just, then the persistently
godless will be punished. The condition of justice occurs, consequently
the punishment occurs too. Thus it is also in the case of the disjunctive
inference, and the inference from the universal to the particular is a
generates principium of inferences of reason, and not of categorical inferences alone. However, if one explains the dictum de omni et nullo as the
scholastics usually do, Quidquid valet de genere vel specie valet quoque de
omnibus sub isto genere vel specie contentisj* then it can be regarded only as a
principium of categorical inferences of reason, because here only the relation between a subject and predicate" is indicated. For this is as much as to
say that what is affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject is affirmed
or denied of all the other things that stand under the subject. The minor^.b
This or that also stands under the subject, ergoL it is affirmed or denied.
Here there is merely a relation of concepts, namely, of subject to predicate, consequently it can be regarded in this relation' as a principium of
categorical inferences. The principium of categorical inferences we now
want to explain'' in such a way that we will also, at the same time, provide a
proof of it. A proposition that is to become the principium of the possibility
of inferences of reason" cannot in turn be proved, for since i/ lies at the
ground of the possibility of all inferences of reason, one would have to
presuppose it in order to prove it, in order to prove its possibility^ based on
it,* which would be an obvious circle. This highest principium of all categorical inferences, through which the dictum de omni et nullo can also be
proved, is this: nota notae est nota rei ipsius et repugnam notae, repugnans rei
ipsi.' What belongs to the mark of a thing belongs to all the things-' that are
contained under it.6 E.g., nothing composite is a thinking thing, atqui all
bodies are composite, consequently no body is a thinking thing, i.e., to be
composite contradicts all thinking things. To be composite is a mark of
bodies, repugnans notae, which is contradicted by the thinking being,*
° Reading "zwischen einem subiect und praedicat" for "einem subject und praedicat,"
with Finder.
* Reading "stehen. Minor:" for "stehen minor.," with Finder.
' Reading "Beziehung" for "Bejahung," with Finder.
Reading "erklären" for "erlauben," with Finder.
Reading "Vernunftschlüße" for "Vernunft," with Finder.
f Reading "er" for "es," with Finder.
1 Reading "seine Möglichkeit" for "eine Möglichkeit," with Finder.
Reading "aus ihm" for "aus ihn," with Finder.
The mark of a mark is a mark of the thing itself, and what conflicts with the mark
conflicts with the thing itself.
; Reading "komt allen Dingen zu" for "komt allen Merkmaalen eines Dinges zu," with
Finder.
Reading "welchem das denkende Wesen wiederstreitet" for "welches dem denkenden
Wesen wiederstreitet," with Finder.
395
consequently repugnans rei ipsi, consequently to be a thinkingbeing contradicts all bodies. E.g., an affirmative inference. If one takes the proposition,
All bodies are divisible, and it does not seem to be enough to show that
99 divisibilityis a mark of body, then one seeks a nota intermedia, a nota notae.
This immediate mark is being composite, and by means of this being
composite I know that because it holds of all bodies,' divisibility must also
hold of all bodies. Divisibility^] a nota notae, is a nota rei ipsius, a mark of
bodies[.] E.g.,a negative1" inference. No body is indivisible. To be indivisible contradicts all that is composite, and composite contradicts all that is
divisible, consequently it also contradicts all bodies themselves,' repugnans
notae repugnat rei ipsi. From this highest principle the dictum de omni et
nullo is derived. ThegenusL and the species^ are always the nota of the thing,
the universal mark of things that are contained under them. Now quidquid
competit generi," i.e.," every nota of the genusL, or in other words the nota
notae, is a nota rei ipsius[;] i.e., what belongs to the genusL belongs to the
things contained under it, or to the species^ of things that stand under it.
These two propositions are the principles of all categorical inferences of
reason, accordingly, and in fact are the highest principles, so that they in
turn may not be proved, and cannot be.
In every conditioned judgment' there is an antecedens and a consequens^
the principium of all affirmative hypothetical inferences, accordingly, is a
positione antecedents, adpositionem consequents valet consequential The antecedens remains that, quo posito' ponitur conseqens,* and the principium of
negative hypothetical inferences is[:] remoto consequente,' tolliturantecedens "
if I remove the consequent" then the antecedens" cannot remain either.
The principium of all disjunctive inferences is, in every disjunctive
proposition one can infer"" from the truth of a member^ to the falsehood of
all other members, and from the falsehood of all other members to the
truth of the one true one. This is the definition of all disjunctive inferences,2 which consequently may not be proved in turn.
' Reading "Körpern" for "theilbaren," with Finder.
™ Reading "verneinender" for "verneinder," with Finder.
" whatever agrees with the genus.
' Reading "d.i." for"die," with Finder.
* Reading "Urtheil" for "Begrif," with Finder.
* From the positing of the antecedent to the positing of the consequence the consequentia is
valid.
' Reading "posito" for"positio," with Finder.
' [that] by positing which the consequence is posited.
' Reading "consequente" for"antecedente," with Finder.
" Reading "antecedens" for "consequens," with Finder.
1 Reading "consequens" for "antecedens," with Finder.
* Reading "antecedens" for "consequens," with Finder.
* Reading "geschloßen werden kann" for "geschloßen worden."
y Reading "eines Gliedes" for "desGrundes," with Finder.
z Reading "Schlüße" for "Sätze," with Finder.
396
Of the figures of inferences [;] the position of the termini in the premises
of a categorical inference of reason constitutes the 4 figures. These 3
termini are the terminus major, minor, and medius. The premises are the
two propositions, of which the one contains the major terminus, the other
the minorL[;] but because two termini are contained in every judgment, in 100
the major there must also be a terminus medius[;] and since the minor
propositio" must also have 2 termini,the medius must also be contained in it.
The medius terminus appears in both premises, then, and in the four
figures what matters is the position of the medius terminus.
It can stand i. in the locus subiecti in the first premise and in the locus
praedicati in the second, and that is the ist figure[.]
2. it can stand in the locus praedicati in both premises, the second
figure [.]
3. it can stand in the locus subiecti in both premises, the 3rd figure, and
4. it can stand in the locus praedicati in the first proposition and in the
locus subieäi in the second, and this is the 4th figure.
The 4 positions*of the medius terminus can be cognized according to the
following table.8
Fig. I. Fig. II Fig.III.
Med. term. Praed. Praed. med. term. Med. term. Praed.
Subiect med. term. Subiect med. term. Med. term. Subiect
Fig. IV.
Praed. med. term.
Med. term. Subiect
One sees quite well that the fourth is the first wholly converted, and
the 3rd is the 2nd converted. Example of the ist figure: The conclusion
is to be, No body is a thinking substance. The medius terminus is because a body is composite[;] body is the terminus minor, thinking substance the terminus major. The inference, then, will run thus: Nothing
composite is a thinking substance[;] here the terminus medius stands in
the locus subjecti[;] atqui, all bodies are composite[;] here the medius
terminus stands in the locus praedicati. ErgoL, No body is a thinking substance. The predicate of the conclusion is the major terminus, the subject the terminus minor.
Example in the 2nd figure: The proposition is again to be, No body is a 101
thinking being[;] medius terminus, because it is composite. Here the terminus medius must stand in the locus praedicati in both premisesf;] hence the
major terminus, thinking being, will be the subject in the majorL, and the
Reading "propositio" for "Terminus," with Finder.
Reading "positionen" for "propositiones," with Finder.
397I M M A N U E L KANT
minor terminus[,] body, will be the subject in the minorL. Hence, no thinking being is composite, atqui all bodies are composite, ergoL no body is a
thinking being. Example in the ^rd figure. The proposition is: Some who
are virtuous are imperfectf;] the medius terminus, because they are men.
The medius terminus[,] man[,] will stand in the locus subiecti in both premises. The major terminus will be the predicate in the major propositio, and
the minor terminus will be the predicate in the minorL. Thus: All men are
imperfect, some men are virtuous, consequently some who are virtuous
are imperfect. Example in the 4thßgure[:] The conclusion is to be: Something that has a power to act is a spirit[;] the medius terminus, because it is a
substance. The medius terminus[,] substance, will be the predicate in the
majorL, the subject in the minorL. Spirit will be the subject in the majorL
and having a power to act' will be the predicate in the minorL. Thus: Every
spirit is a substance, every substance has a power to act, hence something
that has a power to act is a spirit.
All inferences of reason must have as their basis the correct rule: that
I can proceed from a nota remota per notam intermediamd to the thing,
according to the rule above:'' nota notae est nota rei ipsius, in the case of
affirmative inferences. The majorL says this is a nota, the minorL says this
nota belongs to a thing, ergoL what is attributed in the majorL to the mark
of the thing must be attributed to the thing itself in the conclusion. And
in negative inferences of reason the rule holds: repugnans notae, repugnat
rei ipsi/ E.g., No body is a thinking substance, because it is composite.
102 The majorL says that a thinking substance^ contradicts all being composite. The minorL says that being composite is a mark of bodies, the
condusio that what contradicts the mark of the thing contradicts the thing
itself. Being composite contradicts thinking, [but] being composite is a
mark of body, consequently thinking being contradicts body. Or an affirmative example: All who are learned are mortal[;] to be mortal is a mark
of all men, and to be a man is a mark of all who are learned. Conclusion:
hence to be mortal is also a mark of all who are learned, nam nota notae
est nota rei ipsius.
The terminus medius has the position of a nota intermedia only when it
stands in the locus subjecti in the majorL and in the locus praedicati in the
minor, otherwise it never does. We saw this in our example in the ist
figure. Thinking contradicts body[;] thinkingis the nota remota, this contradicts the nota intermedia, being composite, consequently it must also contradict body.* In the majorL it has to be the subject because I want to say of
' Reading "eine Kraft zu handeln haben" for "Kraft zu handeln, seyn,."
' from aremote mark through anintermediate mark.
' Reading "obigen Regel" for"ÜbrigenRegel," with Finder.
f What conflicts with a mark conflicts with the thing itself.
* Reading "substantz" for "substantz,".
* Reading "Körper" for "denkenden Wesen," with Finder.
398
the predicate that it belongs to or contradicts the subject. In the minorL it
has to be the predicate, because it is a nota of the terminus minor, and a
nota is always just exactly a predicate)^] consequently' if the medius terminus is to represent aj nota intermedia, it must be placed as it stands in the
ist figure. In the 2nd figure it simply does not stand in the position of a*
nota intermedia in the majorL, for there the nota remota is supposed to be
compared with the intermedia; hence it has to stand in the locus praedicati,
because a nota is exactly a predicate. If we recall our example above, then
we see that it does not follow as in the first figure, and we make leaps. In
both cases we compare thinking and being a body with being composite,'
and hence we do not infer from the nota remota through the intermedia to
the thing. If being composite is to be a nota intermedia, then it has to stand 103
in the locus subiecti in the majorL[;] for if everythingstands in proper order,
then I say that what contradicts the mark contradicts the thing itself. All
bodies are composite, consequently thinking contradicts body. Repugnant
notae, repugnat rei ipsi. So too in the 3rd figure[;] I infer in our example
above from man to the imperfection of those who are virtuous. Through
leaps, and not at all through a nota intermedia. The minor propositio would
really have to be converted simpliciter, so that the intermedia would obtain
the locus praedicati. Thus all men are imperfect, some who are virtuous are
men,"1 consequently some" who are virtuous are imperfect. The difference
in the 4th figure comes because I slip a consequentia immediata into a
ratiocinium, and thereby make a ratiocinium hybridum[;} and from this it
follows that we always infer in the ist figure, that we only need a metathesis
terminorum0 in thought, whereby reason is brought again to the first figure.
E.g., the inference in the 2nd figure: No thinking being is composite,
conversely, nothing composite is a thinking being, consequentia immediata^,} atqui all bodies are composite, consequently no body is a thinking
being. Here I have converted simpliciter and have thereby reduced the
inference to the ist figure. E.g., our inference in the 3Jrd] figure[;] the
majorL, All men are imperfect, stands as in the first and remains[;] the
minorL, Some men are virtuous, is converted simpliciter. Some who are
virtuous are men[;] consequently some who are virtuous are imperfect.
The minorterminusp is transported[;] thus it* comes to stand in the position
Reading "als praedicat folglich" for "als praedicat folglich, folglich," with Finder.
; Reading "eine" for"ein," with Finder.
Reading "einer" for "eines," with Finder.
Reading "mit dem zusammengesezt seyn" for "mit dem zusammengesezt seyn des einen
praedicat."
Reading "einige Tugendhafte sind Menschen" for "einige Menschen sind Tugendhafte," with Finder.
Reading "einige" for "alle," with Finder.
transposition of terms (reading "Metathesis" for "Mathesis," with Finder).
' Reading "Minor terminus" for"Minor: terminus," with Finder.
* Reading "er" for "minor," with Finder.
399
ofr the nota intermedia. In the 4th figure several alterations occur: firstly,
the minorL is made the majorL. Thus I infer: Every substance has a power
to act, every spirit is a substance, consequently every spirit has a power to
act. 2ndly the conclusion is converted per accidens. Thus I say: Something
that has a power to act is a spirit. I see from obscure perceptions that I
have to infer in this way, because otherwise there would be no sense5 in
the inference, and I would not know how I came to it.
Inferences in the last 3' figures are all correct inferences, but they are
not logically perfect, insofar as the mtiocinium is not purum but rather
hybridum, since a consequentia immediata has slipped in[;] and although I
can include such a consequentia immediata, it is nonetheless not a real
mtiocinium. We see, then, that the first figure prevails through all the
other figures, that the medius terminus must always be the nota intermedia,
that one can bring it into this position" in the 3 remaining figures
through conversion, simpliciter or per accidens, or per metathesin in the 4th
figure.
Of the modi of inferences ofreason[.] The modus in an inference of reason
consists of the qualities and quantities1' of the 3 propositions of an inference. Because the quality and quantity are indicated by the 4 letters
104 A:E:I:O, we will present"7 them in every inference by 3 of these letters,
because there are only three propositions. E.g., A:A:A, i.e., the maior is
universaliter affirmans, the minorL universaliter affirmans, the conclusio universaliter affirmans[;] one expresses this bArbArA, and adds the consonants
only for the sake of making it sound good, although they mean nothing.
Or E.A.E., i.e., the maior is universaliter" negans, the minorL universaliter
affirmans, the conclusio universalitery negans; or A.I.I.[,] universaliter* affirmans, particulariter affirmans, particulariter affirmans." E.I.O.[,] and so
forth[;] one can begin with A[:] A.E.A.[,] A.E.I.[,], A.E.O.[,],/>/>;•> because
there are 4 letters, each can be altered 16 times, and there arise 64 modi of
inferences of reason, which, however, except for a few, have no further
names. According to the adjoining table.
' Reading "an die Stelle" for "an statt der Stelle,"with Finder.
' "kein Verstand."
' Reading "in den 3 letzten" for "in den 4," with Finder.
" Reading "in diese Stellung" for "in dieser Stellung," with Finder.
" Reading "Qualitäten und Quantitäten" for "Qualiteten," with Finder.
* Reading "angeben" for "angegeben," with Finder.
* Reading "universaliter" for "universalis," with Finder.
" Reading "universaliter" for "universalis," with Finder.
" Reading "universaliter" for "universalis," with Finder.
' Reading "particulariter affirmans, particulariter affirmans" for "particulariter affirmans," with Finder.
400
A.A.A. I I I . E.EE O O O
A.E.A I E.I. E A E O E O
A E.I I E A. E A.I. OEI.
A.E.O IE.O E A O O E A
A I E IA.E. E I A OAE
A.IO. l a O E I O . O A I
A A E . U.E. E E A O O E.
A O A I O.I. E O E O I O
A O E IOE. E O A O I E
A O I IO.A E O I O l a
A O O I O O . E O O O I L
A l l . I a a. E I I O A A
A.EE I E E . E a a. O E E.
A I A I I A E I E O A O .
A A O . I O O . E E O O O I .
OOA.
Among these many are excluded because they contradict the universal
rules of inferences of reason; but in the end, then, 19 of 64 must still*
remain, which are composed in accordance with the universal rules of
inferences of reason.
The universal rules of inferences of reason are.
1. There must not be more than 3 termini in the inferencef.]
2. The medius terminus must be only in the premises.
3. Expuris negatiuis nihil sequitur[\]c the ground of which is that in every
inference of reason there is a rule and a subsumption under the rule/ now
it may be affirmative or negative, but I have to subsume affirmatiue, for I
can always say affirmatiue that this concept stands under the condition of
the rule[.] Every proposition that says whether something stands under
the rule is affirmative; accordingly, every subsumption in accordance with
the nature of the inference of reason must always be affirmative. If it were
negative there would be no subsumption under the condition of the rule/
4. Ex puris particularibus nihil sequitur/ If there were only particular
propositions, there would be no rule, since every rule must of course be
universal.
5. Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem? The conclusion follows the part
of the premises that is negative or particular and arranges itself according
' Reading "müssen doch am Ende noch" for "muß doch am Ende doch," with Finder.
' From negatives alone nothing follows.
' Reading "der Regel" for"den Regeln," with Finder.
' Reading "subsumzion unter der Bedingung" for "subsumzion nach der Natur der
Vernunftschlüße immer bejahend seyn. Wäre sie verneinend so wäre sie gar keine subsumzion under der Bedingung," with Finder.
f From particulars alone nothing follows.
8 The conclusion follows the weaker part.
401I M M A N U E L KANT
to it. The pars debiliorh means a negative or a particular proposition. That
the rule is certain becomes clear from the fact that if one of the premises
is particular, the subsumption is certainly particular. But if I have subsumed particularly, then I can only say of some that the predicate belongs
to them. The conclusion always follows the subsumption quoad quantitatem,' then. Si pmemissorum una est negatiua, conclusio etiam est negativa[;]j
for if I say, No man is without errors, all who are virtuous are men, then
the conclusion must be negative too, because the rule says that everything
that is under the condition is to be denied. Hence the conclusion must
contain the negation too.
Given these rules, only 19 of the remaining 64 modi are left, and of
these 9 are also excluded, so that we have 10 modi utili, because among
the 19 inferences of reason that it is possible to conceive, 9 are useless
105 translations of the truth.
Logicians present rules in the case of every figure.* The rule for the
first is' maior sit universalis, minor affirmans."1 One can see, however, that
the former has to be a rule for all inferences of reason, for" every rule
must be universal. The minorL is the subsumption under the rule[;] every
subsumption is affirmative, however, consequently the minorL must be
affirmans[;] this also holds for all inferences of reason.
In the first figure we can have conclusions of any quality and quantity[;]
we can have universal affirmative, universal negative, and particular affir- j
mative and negative propositions^] but in all the other figures only conclusions of a certain kind can be inferred, and not in every quality and
quantity. In the 2nd figure the conclusion is always negative, in the 3rd it
is alwaysparticular, and in the 4th figure it is alwaysparticular or negative.
A universal affirmative simply may not be thought in the 4th figure. The
restriction already indicates that in the inferences in other figures there
are certain conditions, under which they can be brought into the first
figure, and these conditions make the conclusion be restricted to certain
conditions. E.g., in the 2nd figure. No thinking being is composite, all
bodies are composite, consequently no body is a thinking being. In the
maiorL the medius terminus stands converted, and not as it is in the ist
figure[;] in the minor it stands correctly. If this" inference is to be brought
into the ist figure, then, it must be preceded by a metathesis terminorum in
the maior, and the medius terminus must stand in the locus subjecti. We say,
* weaker part.
' as to quantity.
; Ifoneofthe premises isnegative, the conclusion isnegative too.
* Reading "bey jeder Figur" for "bey jeder Vernunft and Figur," with Finder.
' Reading "Die Regel für die erste ist" for "Die Regel ist die erste," with Finder.
™ The major should be universal, the minor affirmative.
" Reading "denn" for "und," with Finder.
° Reading "dieser" for "diesen," with Finder.
402
then, that nothing composite is a thinking being, atqui all bodies are
composite, consequently no body is a thinking being. Now the inference is
correct. The rule of the ist figure is, the majorL is to be universal, hence if
a metathesis is to occur, the transposition of the termini must be such that
the universality is not lost. No conversio per acddens can take place, then,
because through this the majorL would become particular[;] consequently
the majorpropositio in the 2nd figure simply cannot be affirmative, because
an affirmative proposition can only be converted per acddens, and then the
majorL in the first figure would not come out universal. Hence in the
secundafigura the majorL must always be a negative proposition. One can
also convert the majorL through contrapositiones, for from this there always
emerges*1 a negative proposition. Now it is said that conclusio sequitur
partem debiliorem[;] where the majorL is negative the conclusion will be
negative too. The consequentia immediata that I draw in the 2nd figure is to
contain a universal proposition. Now since an affirmative proposition can
never be converted simplidter, the majorL in the 2nd figure cannot be
affirmative. No affirmative proposition can arise through metathesis^ for if
an affirmative proposition is to be converted, it would have to be converted per acddens[;} consequently it must either be a negative proposition
or, if it is affirmative, it has to? be contraposed[;] i.e., if the proposition will
also be negative, then the conclusion will consequently alwaysbe negative.
The 2nd figure does not infer purely, then, because the major^ must
always be converted, and the cause of the fact that the conclusion must
always be negative lies in this, that the 2nd figure does not infer immedi- 106
ately through its majorL, but rather by a universal negative proposition
being inserted. Example in the 3rd figure. All men are imperfect, some
men are virtuous, consequently some who are virtuous are imperfect. The
majorL stands correct. In the minorL the medius terminus stands incorrectly[;] here a metathesis terminorum must occur, then. In the first figurer
the minorL is qffirmans, consequently the transposition must occur in such
a way that the proposition that comes from it is always affirmative and
never negative. Hence it will not be possible to convert it per contrapositionem, because from this a negative proposition arises, but rather per
conversionem. Hence the proposition that comes from this must be affirmative. Now if the minorLs in the III figura is universal, only a particular
proposition can emerge from this, because affirmative propositions may
only be converted per acddens. If the minorL is particular, then it is converted simplidter and remains particular. Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem[;] the conclusion must always be particular, then. We see, then, that
' Reading "wird immer" for"wird immer wieder," with Finder.
* Reading "muß . . . contraponirt werden" for "muß . . . contraponirt werden müßen,"
with Finder.
Reading "In der ersten Figur" for "In der Figur," with Finder.
* Reading "minor" for "major," with Finder.
403
the ist figure infers in the 3rd, since' the termini" are transposed through a
consequentia immediata that is inserted in thought. In the 4th figure there
are no universal affirmative conclusions. Here one has to convert 2 times;
one converts either both the premises or the conclusion and one premise.
All logicians admit that the inference in the 4th figure is unnatural, because 2 consequentiae immediatae that occur in thought have to be inserted.
To insert one, as occurs in the 2nd and 3rd figure, is still natural, but
when one is to do it 2 times, then one finds difficulty. This is mentioned in
order to show that this game of the 4 figures is nothing but an artifice for
confusing, in that one hides the simple under the complicated.
To make possible the reduction1 of inferences to the ist figure, logicians have sought out some barbaric words[,] in order to determine, in
accordance with the 4 vowels A.E.I.O.f,] the qualities and quantities that
occurf;]1" the consonantes, however, are not merely for the sake of euphony,
but in order to indicate, in the case of figures other than the ist, through
what kind of metathesis^ the reduction to the ist figure is possible. Toward
this end, the following verse is to be noted. S. vult simpliciter verti, P. vero
per acddens, M. vult transport!, C. per impossibile dud[;] i.e., a proposition in
which an S stands is to be converted simpliciter, where a P stands per
acddens, where an M stands it is to be converted, and where a C stands
contraposed. These words are in the ist figure: bArbArA, cElArEnt,* dArll,
FErlO. Here the consonants mean nothing, because they are already in
the first figure. In the 2nd figure: cEsArE, cAmEstrES,ffistlnO, bArOccO. In
the 3rd figure dArAptI,ßL4ptOn,y disAmis* dAthl," bOcArdO,/ErhOn. In
the 4th figure cAlEmEs,b bAmAlIp,'dImAth,dßsApO,efrEsIsOm/These are
together the 19 possible inferences in all figures, for although one has
calculated 64 modi, there remain after the usual rules only 19, and of
these^ only 10 are useful, as the logicians admit, because the remaining 9
only infer quite indirecte. It is to be noted that in the words the consonants
are always connected with the preceding vowels[;] I must not say ce-sa-re
' Reading "indem" for "indem ein Gedannke," with Finder.
" Reading "Termini" for "Säzze," with Finder.
* Reading "Reduktion" for "Relazion," with Finder.
* Reading "die vorkommenden Qualitaeten und Quantitaeten" for "die vollkommen die
Qualitaeten und Quantitaeten," widi Finder.
' Reading "cElArEnt" for"cESArEnt," with Finder.
y Reading "fElAptOn" for "fEcAptOn," widi Finder.
z Reading "disAmis" for "dlFAnls," with Finder.
' Reading "dAtlsI"for"dAtlFI," with Finder.
* Reading "cAlEmEs" for "cAEemEs," with Finder.
' Reading "bAmAUp" for"bOmAUp," widi Finder.
1 Reading "dlmAtls" for "dlmAelS," with Finder.
' Reading "fEsApO" for"sEsApO," with Finder.
f Reading "frEsIsOm" for "frEsIsO," with Finder.
* Reading "von diesen" for "von diesem," with Finder.
404
but rather cet-ar-e, not ca-me-stres but cam-estr-es, and so forth. This 107
indicates that in camestres, in the majorL, because M stands there, the
proposition must be transposed, then S: vult simpliciter verti[;] the conclusio
(es) S: vult simpliciter verti[.] E.g., fest-in-o. In the majorL there is to be a
conversion S: simpliciter.h
Besides categorical inferences, about which the logicians make such a
fuss, there are' hypothetical and disjunctive ones. A hypothetical inference
is one whose majorL is a hypothetical proposition, in7 which [there is] an
antecedent and a* consequent, a proposition that contains a ground and
another that contains a consequence. E.g., If God is just, then the persistently godless will be punished. The minorL can subsume in 2 ways,
ponendo antecedent1 and negando consequent.™ In the case of hypothetical
syllogisms, then, there are 2 modi, a modus ponens and tollem. The modus
ponens infers a positione antecedent^ ad positionem consequentis." The modus
tollens infers a remotione0 consequentis ad remotionem antecedents.p Per modum
ponentem I infer: atquiverum estprius, ergo etposterius.q God is just, conclusion, hence he punishes the wicked. Per modum tollentem I infer: atqui
falsum estpotteriut, ergo etprius[.]r He who is beheaded is dead, It is false
that he is dead, consequently it is also false that he is beheaded. In the
case of modus tollens I cannot infer from the falsehood of the antecedent to
the falsehood of the consequent, but rather conversely[;] for the ground can
be false, and the thing itself nonetheless true, and this based on a different
ground[;] for even if someone is not beheaded, he can have died from
disease.
In the disjunctive inference there is always a disjunctiveproposition, in
which the membra disjunctions* are contained. Here we infer either per
modum ponentem, atqui, one of the membra is true, consequently all the
others must be false, or per modum tollentem. All the membra are false
except one, consequently that one must be true. E.g., The soul is simple
or composite, but it is not composite, consequently it is simple.
A dilemma^ is an inference of reason that is composed of a hypothetical and a disjunctive inference, where the major is a hypothetical proposiReading "simpliciter" for "simplex," with Finder.
Reading "giebt es" for "giebt," with Finder.
Reading "der, dessen major ein hypothetischer Satz ist, in" for "der, in," with Finder.
Reading "und ein" for "zu einer," with Finder.
by affirming the antecedent.
by negating the consequent.
from the positing of the antecedent to the positing of the consequent.
Reading "a remotione" for "ad remotionem," with Finder.
from the removal of the consequent to the removal of the antecedent.
but the first is true, therefore the second istoo.
but the second is false, therefore the first is too.
members of the disjunction.
405I M M A N U E L KANT
tion, whose consequent,' however, is a disjunctive"judgment[.] E.g., If this
world is not the best, then God was not able to create a better one or he
did not want to. Now I infer a remotione consequentis ad remotionem antecedents. I reflect on1' the comequens per omnia membra. I say: He could have
created a better world, for God is omnipotent!;] he wanted to create a
better world, for he is good[;] consequently it is false that this world is not
the best. A dilemma^ is thus a hypothetical inference, for the major
propositio contains a hypothesis, but the comequens" of this proposition is
disjunctive and has to be negated per omnia membra. The ancients made
much of this dilemma^ and called it" a horned^ inference, Syllogismus
cornutus. They commonly said, then, if you maintain this, then you must
also maintain this and that. But these propositions are false, consequently
what you maintain is also false[;] all the ways you can go are false,2
consequently you have no way to go. In metaphysics, especially, one can
show difficulties'* with a multitude of claims/ turn where one will. Since
certain cognitions are such that they produce difficulties in application in
concrete. E.g., If the human will is free, then it must be bound neither by
nature nor by moral laws. If it is an exception to the law of nature, then
108 this is combined with great difficulty, because thenr one would not be able
to see how free actions are possible. If free actions are not bound by the
moral law, then every free action will be contingent, and all moralitywill
disappear. Here difficulties appear on all sides, and it is a sophistical trick
not to maintain the opposite but always just to point out individual difficulties. By this means one can make even experience doubtful, which, however, is the ground of all our certainty. The skeptics were sophists who
denied the certainty of all claims. They said: If you maintain that, then you
end up in all these difficulties, and they made the other quite confused.
One can maintain his principal propositions by proving them apagogice
from the opposite[;] but because the incomprehensibility'' of the opposite
only indicates a difficulty with the opposite, and because incomprehensibility and impossibility are hard to distinguish, there is always something
misleading in this, and it leans toward sophistry when' one proves merely
from the opposite. E.g., If someone has bought stolen goods, then he must
Reading "Consequens" for "Consequenz," with Finder.
Reading "disjunctives" for "hypothetisches," with Finder.
"Ich reflectire."
Reading "Consequens" for "Consequenz," with Finder.
Reading "es" for "ihm," with Finder.
Reading "gehörnten" for "gehörten," with Finder.
Reading "sind falsch, folglich" for "folglich."
Reading "Schwierigkeiten" for "Schwierigkeit," with Finder.
Reading "Behauptungen" for "Behauptung," with Finder.
Reading "denn" for "den," with Finder.
Reading "Unbegreiflichkeit" for "Unmöglichkeit."
Reading "Sophysterey, wenn" for "Sophysterey. wenn."
406
either surrender them to the owner, or he must keep them for himself. If
I assume the first, then I can say, how can I know whether or not I am
buying stolen things[;] I am never certain whether the salesman hasn't
stolen the wares from someone else. Hence it is an absurdity if I am to
surrender them. If I say I am keeping them, then an absurdity also
emerges, and through such proofs the thing would cease to belong to the
owner; but the way of arguing is so deceitful that through the indicated
difficulties one can attack even true propositions. Hence all sophists
have used dilemmata extensively, and even the most honest men may
argue for good things through crookednessf;] of this sort are the holy
piaefraudes/ where one presents legends as true, because pious decisions
are thereby achieved[.] But one must look not only to the intention but
also to the means, whether they are rightful. Thus they have[,] e.g., an
argumentum a tutof that one achieves the most security* if one chooses
one party. But here the question is not what produces the greatest
advantage, but what is true. They say it cannot harm a man at all if he
believes something that he cannot get to the bottom of; rather, it helps
him. But basically these are intrigues, and one ought to say to what
extent one has insight into the thing. The honest man must not disguise
anything, must not affect speculations where there are none, and he
must call all things by their names[;] good intention does not come into
consideration here. Quintilian gives orators a rule that does not give one
an all-too-favorable idea of omtores: that they are to present many argumenta, even if weak ones, so that the people will finally be persuaded by
such a mass of grounds.10 It is not the advice of an honest man to state
many argumenta that prove nothing- tarnen valent.' Alten - n This artof
making deceptions can be lucrative, but it cannot be united with honesty,
and arts of this kind must be banished from philosophyf;] and the simpler an object is, the more directly one must speak. The multitude of the 109
arguments counts for nothing.
There are formal and covert inferences. An inference that contains all
the propositions from which an inference of reason can come about, but
in which the form is not expressed but rather thought, is covert. E.g., All
bodies are divisible because they are composite. This is a Syllogismus
crypticus. The formal inference is called [syllogismus] formalis. One leaves
out a proposition because it would be too extensive always to infer formally. But no man infers anything without thinking formally, and in our
reason itself every inference is formal[;] when we communicate, however,
and make ourselves understandable explidte, then we can leave out some
pious deceptions.
8
argument based on security.
Reading "das sicherste Teil" for "das schwerste Teil," with Finder,
but are valid all the same.
407
expressions' that must be met with in our thought, because if we were not
to think thus, then there might be no connection among our thoughts.
Reason always infers formally, however, as soon as the inference indicates
anything to a man[;] thus it can occur through a cryptic inference, which is
also called an enthymema, since the premise or the conclusion is left out,
which one can complete in thought.
There are 2 kinds of inferences that actually do not belong to logic but
really have no other place, namely, per inductionem and per analogiam. We
infer per inductionem when we take it as a basis that what belongs to many
things of the genus*belongs to the remaining things ofthat genus. This is
not really a pure inference, of course, for I cannot infer from the particular to the universal. However, there is no other way that we can determine
our universal judgments through experience. Who can be acquainted
with' all things that belong under a certain genus? However, I must know
the properties of the genus"1 through which it is a genus, because only then
can I represent it to myself. E.g., All bodies are heavy is a true, but
nonetheless not a certain proposition. For although Euler12 admits that all
bodies are heavy, he nonetheless suspects that the upper ether is not
heavy," and this proves that one may not maintain heaviness of all matter
with certainty, and then the proposition is not universal. The medicus and
the anatomicus call that a casus praeternaturalis. Induction is a crutch,
however. We infer that we have cognized the thing in so many species^ of
the genus, so it will belong to the remaining speciesL too. Given the many
things in which we have been able to consider the matter, we say that it
will belong to the remaining ones too. According to induction, from a
great multitude of things that belong to a genus we can well presume that
this mark will belong to all the remaining things that belong to the genus[;] but this is always only an empirical universality.Rational universality is strict[;] here what I attribute to the concept universallyactually does
belong to all the things without exception. Empirical universality, on the
other hand, is a broad universality[;] I say that I may maintain something
universally because I act correctly in doing so. However, this is quite
uncertain. I infer according to analogy thus: when two or more things
from a genus agree with one another in as many marks as we have been
able to discover, I infer that they will also agree with one another in the
remaining marks that I have not been able to discover. When things agree
no on many points, then I say that they will also agree in the remaining marks"
' Reading "sokönen wireinige Ausdrükke weglaßen" for"sokönen wireinige Ausdrükke
verständlich machen; so könen wir einige Ausdrükke weglaßen," with Finder.
* Reading "Gattung" for "Gattungen," with Finder.
' Reading "kennen" for"könen," with Finder.
™ Reading "Gattung" for "Gattungen," with Finder.
" Reading "schwer" for "schwerer," with Finder.
' Reading "Merkmalen" for"Vernunft theilen," with Finder.
408
with which I am not yet acquainted[;] I infer, then, from some marks to all
the other ones, that they will also agree in these. E.g., The moon has
mountains and valleys, day and night, our earth has day and night/ and so
forth; since the moon has much similarity with our earth, I will attribute to
it many of the properties of the earth. We must proceed empirically in
accordance with analogy or we will not acquire extended cognition, and
without universal rules we cannot draw a universal inference. One cannot
possibly examine an object regarding all its properties. Thus if 2 things
agree in as many things as one is acquainted with,' one infers that they will
also agree in the remaining points. That really does not hold/ but what
else are we to do? Induction and analogy are inseparable from our cognitions, and yet errors for the most part arise from them. We are always
acquainted only with something in things, and we infer that here it will be
as nice as it is in other things. Since we cannot do without a crutch for the
human understanding, we must pay heed to whether a mistaken inference
is made here.
The propositions in an inference can be true, but the inference can
nonetheless be false as to form, i.e., a fallacy. Here one can either be
deceived oneself, so that one misleads oneself and does not observe the
logical form, and then it is5 a paralogismus; or insofar as one seeks
intentionally to mislead others, and then it is a sophisma[;] for when I do
not have the intention of misleading others, then it is a paralogismus.
Those in the Megaric school, and subsequently also the stoics, exerted
much effort and occupied themselves much with these conjurer's tricks,'
with making sophisms, through which they embarassed the logici.
The logician is required not only to cognize that an inference is false;
rather, he must also state the rule that is contrary to the inference. Hence
they sought names where this violation of the rule was hidden and could
not easily be discovered. Thus they had sophisma" sensus compositi et diuisi,1'
a dicto secundum quid" ad dictum simpliciter," pp[.] E.g. A farmer's son came
home to his father in the evening[;] since the father could not prepare
anything else for him quickly, he cooked 3 eggs. The young man wanted
to show his learnedness and began to philosophize: Where there are 3
there are also two, two and 3 make 5, consequently there are 5 eggs lying
there[;] the father was startled by his son's learned mind, ate up the 3
f Reading "unsre Erde hat Tag und Nacht, und sofort" for "unsre Erde hat des Nachts
einen Mond und sofort."
* Reading "als man kennt" for "als man könt," with Finder.
Reading "nicht an" for "nicht anders an," widi Finder.
Reading "und dann ists" for "und ists," with Finder.
Reading "Taschenspielkünsten" for "Taschenspielkünstlern," with Finder.
Reading "Sophism" for "Sophisma," with Finder.
Sophisms of composition and division.
Reading "secundum quid" for "secundum, und," with Finder.
from what is said with qualification to what is said simply.
409
eggs, and told the son to eat the remaining 2, which was quite the best way
to refute this sophisma. As soon as one tried to clothe this in the form of a
syllogism, the vitium would at once strike the eye.
The sophisma figurae dictionisy is where the medius terminus is taken in
different meanings. E.g., A philosopher is a kind of learned man. Leibniz
was a philosopher, consequently Leibniz was a genus of learned man.Vox
medii termini,' philosopher, is taken in different meanings[;] one time it is
taken as a predicate, and the other time as a multitude of things to which
in the predicate belongs. When die medius terminus in the two premises is
taken in different meanings, then this always yields ufallacium. E.g., no"
artist is born; some men are artistsf;] hence some men are not born. In the
majorL the medius terminus means the art, and in the minorL die man.
Sophisma a dicto, secundum quid, ad dictum simplidter[;] one could almost
allow this, but with some restriction. E.g., He who says you are an ass says
you are an animal, consequendy he who says you are an ass speaks die
trudi. He says die truth in part, for in saying diat I am an ass he also says
that I am an animalf.] Or, e.g., He who says that the respondent is a man
speaks die truth[;] he who says that a Moor is a man speaks the truth[;]
consequently he who says that the respondent is a Moor speaks the truth.
But even this can be granted in part; he says more than that the respondent is a man, of course, but in saying that he is a Moor he also says that
he is a man. What he ought to accept secundum quid11 he understands
simpliciter.
An example of a sophisma figurae dictionis can also be this. A lady was
traveling with some learned men, and since diey lost their way they asked
a farmer which way to go. The farmer asked them if diey understood
Latin, and since they said they did, the farmer answered that they should
just go straight ahead; but soon they came to a morass, where they quickly
got stuck. Hence they turned around and asked the farmer about his
advice. What? replied the farmer. One can go through the whole world
with Latin, and you cannot even go through this swamp? The farmer took
the word world on one occasion for the society of men, and on the other in
its geographical meaning.
A sophisma heterozeteseos1 is when someone who'' wants to prove a proposition proves something else[;] e.g., he is supposed to prove that die soul is
immortal, and he only proves that it is simple. The persistence of a simple
being after death still does not prove immortality, which indicates the
" sophism of the figure of speech.
z The expression for the middle term.
" Reading "kein" for "ein," with Finder.
* with qualification.
' sophism of misdirection (reading "sophisma heterozeteseos" for "sophima a
heterozeteseos," with Finder).
* Reading "jemand, der einen" for "jemand einen," with Finder.
410
continuation of its life. In just the same way one commits a sophisma in the
concept of the existence of God when one pretends to give a proof of it.
They do prove that a being of many perfections^ must be the cause of the
world, but it must also be proved that the cause of the world is not just any
being of great perfection but that it is a single being. It must be proved not
merely that it is inexpressibly great, but that it has all power, not merely
that it has a great understanding but that all cognitions belong to it. The
whole of nature cannot prove this much to us, however, hence there is a
sophisma hetewzeteseos here, in that I answer something other than what I
was asked. I prove the existence of some sublime cause/which must be
very great, but the question here is not about this but about the primal
being/
The sophisma ignorationis elenchi is when someone means to dispute
something but does not refute the other; rather, he refutes what he imagines to be the other's opinion. He refutes his own fancy, then, which he
imagined based on the other's propositions[;] e.g., when I say that the
apodeictic proof of the immortality of the soul is not given in philosophy,
then someone else would commit a sophisma ignorationis elenchi if he were
to come and say that we have no grounds at all for accepting the immortality of the soul, but only probable supposition. There is no talk here of its
not being possible to prove the proposition speculatively, however, but
only of its mode of proof. An elenchusL is the distinct representation of the
purpose of a claimf;] I must know exactly* what our dispute is about,
otherwise I commit a sophisma ignorationis elenchi.
Most of the business of the Megaric' school was with sophistries, and
most of the tricks were applied by them for miserable purposes, for the
tying of knots/ in order to give others the trouble of resolving them.
Euclides was the founder of this school, not the mathematician, however,
but Euclides of Megara/ They had, for example, the following sophistries. The Liar[,] mendax[,] got its name from its medius terminus. It runs 112
thus: If you say you lie, and in saying this you speak the truth,' then you
speak the truth in lying. This is incorrect, however[;j it really should run
thus[:] If you say you lie, and in saying this you speak the truth,"1 then
you speak the truth in saying that you lief;] and this is then correct.
' Reading "viel Vollkommenheiten"for"Unvollkommenheiten," with Finder.
1 Reading "irgend einer erhabenen Ursach" for "irgend i erhabene Ursach," with Finder.
8 "Uhrwesen."
* Reading "genau" for "genant," with Finder.
Reading "megarische" for "maligarische," with Finder.
; Reading "Knoten" for"Karten," with Finder.
* Reading "Megara" for "Magorra," with Finder.
Reading "und indem du das sagst, die Wahrheit sagst" for "und jedem du das sagst, und
zwar die Wahrheit sagst," with Finder.
™ Reading "und indem du das sagst die Wahrheit sagst" for "und jedem du die Warheit
sagst," with Finder.
411
Epimenides says, All Cretans are liars[;] he himself is a Cretan[;] hence
he himself lies in saying that Cretans are liars, and so it goes round and
round. Philetas," trying to resolve this liar, racked his brains so much that
he had to wear lead soles so that the wind would not blow him off the
bridge. This is the obvelatus:0 Do you know your father? Yes[;] but I
present him to you obvelatus. Now do you know him? No[;] consequently
you know your father and you do not know him. This is the acervus:p I
put a pile of grain before you[;] is it still a pile if I take away one grain?
Yes[;] if I take away 2? Yes[;] and so forth[;] consequently it does not cease
to be a pile until I take away the last grain. One commonly commits such
[fallacies] in the case of indeterminate defininitions.* E.g., he who is much
too thrifty is miserly. Here I cannot really know where thriftiness ends,
and this is an actual acervus, then. This is the caluus:' When someone has
lost his hair he is called bald. With which hair does he begin to be called
bald? With the first? No[;] with the second? No[;] />/>[;] consequently one
will not be bald as long as one still has one hair. The cornutm* runs thus:
What you have not lost you still have. You have not lost any horns,'
consequently you still have horns.
One can scarcely think of a more pitiful" game, yet at that time someone
who knew how to invent such things was* held to be a fine guest. Peter
Abelard, who was always first among the scholastic philosophers, was
once traveling with a clergyman[;] the clergyman said, Look! there is an ox
flying. Abelard asked, Where? The cleric started laughing and asked,
How could such a great philosopher believe that? Abelard answered, I
believed it more possible for an ox to fly than for a clergyman to lie. We
have quite different inferences which are mentioned in metaphysics,
which belong" under the nature of metaphysical reason, and which no
man can avoid, and which he can cognize only by seeing that he ends up in
conflict with his arguments. We badly need to discover this source, because of which men have always followed this inference. Discovery of it
enlightens the understanding and gives us a sure foundation. Such a
natural sophistication is a real accomplishment, then, and it enlightens the
understanding.
A sorites^ or acervus is a chain of inferences that are subordinated to
one another. It is a chain of inferences of reason, where the conclusion of
" Reading "Philetas" for "Phylotas," with Finder.
° the veiled one.
p the heap.
* "bey dem unbestimten defmiren."
' [the] bald one.
1 [The] horned one.
' Reading "keine Hörner verloren" for "keine Hörner," with Finder.
" Reading "erbärmlicheres" for "erbärmleriches," with Finder.
* Reading "indessen wurde" for "indessen würde," with Finder.
* Reading "gehören" for "gehört," with Finder.
412
one inference becomes the premise of the one following, and it is also
called an enarratio syllogistica* E.g., Everything that thinks is simple, the
soul thinks, hence it is simple. Everything that is simple is indivisible. The
soul is simple, hence it is indivisible. What is indivisible is imperishable.
The soul is indivisible, hence it is imperishable. What is imperishable
persists, the soul is imperishable, hence the soul persists. In this wayI can
make a whole chain of inferences, where I always make the conclusion
into the premise of the following inference. This soritesL is of two kinds,
either downward toward the following premises, or upward toward
grounds. The first occurs when the conclusion of the one becomes the
premise of the other, and is called an episyllogismus. But when the premise
of the one becomes the conclusion of the other, then it is called a
prosyllogismus[.} E.g., Everything imperishable is indivisible, the soul is
imperishable, hence it is indivisible. Everything that persists is imperishable, the soul persists, hence the soul is imperishable. In all disputations^
the prosyllogismosz is disputed.
The opponent must have an argument that is directly opposed to the 113
disputation. Now the respondent allows him to prove one of the premises
through a new inference, and this is then aprosyllogismus. It does not work
per episyllogismum. If, e.g., we had proved the proposition," All laws follow
from the law of nature, and the opponent were to begin[:] What follows
from nature is in accord with wisdom's purpose, consequently the laws of
nature are in accord with wisdom[;] then the respondent would say that
the inference is not contrary to my disputation. Here one does not allow
inference per episyllogismum, then, for the respondent would simply not
know where the chain of inferences was to run, and would allow things
that he would later want to take back. When the propositio major of a chain
of inferences is left out,* then this is called a soritesL[.] E.g., Everything that
thinks is simple, what is simple is indivisible, what is indivisible is imperishable, what is imperishable persists, consequently since the soul thinks it
persists. This sorites^ is categoricus if it consists of nothing but categorical
propositions[;] the two are essentially different, then. A sorites categoricus' is
a chain inference through which the chain of subject and predicate is
given.
A saltus in probandod is the connection of a premise with the conclusion,
where the other premise can be left out. It is called a saltus legitimus if
each of them can be inserted into the thing, since it accords with the
syllogistic explanation.
* Reading "disputationen" for "disputation," with Finder.
Reading "prosyllogismus" for "per syllogismos," with Finder.
Reading "den Satz" for "denn Satz," with Finder.
Reading "propositio major ausgelassen wird" for "propositio, major wird," with Finder.
Reading "Sorites cathegorikus" for "Sorites oder cathegorikus," with Finder.
A leap in proof (reading "saltus" for "faltus," with Finder).
413
natural understanding to add the the minorpropositio in thought. A saltus
illegitimus is one where this is not so clear, and where I make a leap in
that I pass to a thing from a distant cognition without traversing the nota
intermedia.
In all kinds of proof and in all arguments the ground of proof can be
taken gratis^, widiout proving it[.] E.g., it need not be proved that everything contingent has a beginning when one uses the proposition in philosophy; but one seeks die proof, and this is called petere principium* Petitio
principii, then, is the acceptance of an immediate proposition that still
needs a proof. A circulus inprobando? is when I put at the basis of die proof
of a proposition that which is supposed to be proved[.]^ E.g., if we proved,
based on the holy scripture, that this is the word of God. From revelation
alone I cannot prove this. Sometimes the proposition is put at die basis
but remotely, and frequently it is hard to discover. Some people in their
writings save a proof for another place, but when they come to that place
they say dial we have just proved it.*
It happens that one proves too much or that one proves too little. He
who is supposed to prove, e.g., that the soul is immortal, and who only
proves its persistence, proves too little. He proves too much if he also
proves something that is false. If a proof contains too little, that little can
be true, but if it proves too much, then it proves more dian is true, and this
is false, then, and then it proves notiiing at all[;] and one must guard
against this carefully. E.g., If we have not given life, then we may not take
it, either. We have not given it ourselves, hence we cannot take it, either.
We have not given it to a chicken, hence we cannot take it from a chicken,
either.
A locus^' is nothing other than a universal kind of cognition under
which a given cognition can be brought. I am acquainted with movement, as something belonging to natural science, also insofar as it belongs to metaphysics in its effects, and this is then the metaphysical
place-' of motion. A locusL in the metaphysical sense is thus a tide of a
genus of cognitions under which a given cognition can be brought, and
topica is the science of the places that one cognition has under others, est
positus cognitionis in quadam cognitioni generali.k Every universal cognition
has places, for a particular cognition and every system has determinate
places for the parts of the system. It is shown, however, how common
and learned cognition differ, in that common cognition contains an aggre-
' tobegthequestion (literally,tobegtheprinciple).
! Acircle inproving.
1 Reading "lege, was bewiesen werden soll, ZE" for "lege, ZE," with Finder.
* Reading "haben." for "haben," with Finder.
' place, or topic (reading "Ein locus" for "Eine Wißenschaft," with Finder).
' Reading "dermetaphysische Ort" for "diemetaphysische Art," with Finder.
* it is the position of a cognition in a certain general cognition.
414
gate of cognitions, learned cognition a system; or in that a science is
brought into a system.
A system presupposes' the form of the whole before the parts, where the 114
parts have to be determined in accordance with the idea of the whole."1
Hence topic would be the determination of an individual cognition's locus
scientificus in its system, and the art of indicating for various cognitions"
their place in the system. This art would not be bad; Aristotle started it, but
thanks to the scholastic stuff it was again forgotten. E.g., one gives virtue a
place in politics as a doctrine of prudence, in morals as a doctrine of
morality[;] hence what matters is the place to which each member of the
system belongs, because otherwise this would at once become an aggregate."The locus grammaticusvfouldbe if, e.g., I taught about philosophy
grammatically, that according to its etymology the word means love of
wisdom. In the case of the locus logicus I consider the scientific connection, and I thereby*1 define philosophy. The locus logicus involvesdefinitions,
axiomataL, the power of cognition, whether a cognition belongs to concept
or to judgment, whether something is cognized ab oppositis[;]q these are
nothing but locilogici. A locus metaphysicus is, e.g., the matter of the nexus
effeaiuus,' of the whole and the parts[,] of effects and causes. The locus
moralis is when I describe something in accordance with morality. The
locus iuridicus is when I consider whether something is really right/
Locus topicus' is a tautology,but it is common[.] A topic is not bad if, after
one has gone through a science, one can add a topic and see what belongs to
it, and can thereby distinguish" all cognitions[;] for in morals, e.g., much
depends on the place in which a cognition comes to stand.
The 2nd pan of logic, Of the Method of Cognitions. Logic has to do neither
with the observation of things and objects, from which no rules1' for
method can be gained, nor with the observation of the end of cognition,
nor1" with the cognition of the subject. Logic ignores all* of this and deals
merely with the form of the understanding and of reason[;] it ignores the
' Reading "setzt. . . voraus" for "sagt. . . voraus," with Finder.
Reading "nach der Idee des gantzen" for "nach dem Idee den gantzen," with Finder.
Reading "den mancherley Erkentnissen" for "in mancherley Erkenntnissen," with
Pinder.
Reading "ein Agregat" for "eine Kette und ein Agregat."
' Reading "dadurch" for"durch,"with Pinder.
* from its opposite (reading "ab oppositis" for "oppositio," with Pinder).
Reading "nexu effictiuo" for "nexu affectiuo," with Pinder.
Reading "etwas danach betrachte, was eigentlich recht ist" for "etwas betrachte, was
eigentlich recht ist," with Pinder.
Topical topic, or topical place.
Reading "unterscheiden" for "unterscheide."
Reading "keine Regeln" for "allein Regeln," with Pinder.
Reading "noch" for "auch," with Pinder.
* Reading "von dem allen ignorirt" for "von dem allein ignorirt," with Pinder.
415
subject, for it speaks of reason in general. It ignores the final end, for it
asks only-*1 if cognition is in conformity with the condition of the understanding, and what are the rules in conformity with which one can determine the conformity[;] hence the doctrine of method2 is what belongs in
logic. This should be the last thing in any science, for much is required to
show the way on which one is to proceed in a science, and many sciences
are so tangled together that one simply does not know how to distinguish
them. Basically, however, method will here mean nothing but the title and
the terminitechnid in the case of methodf;] logic cannot do more, for it is a
propaedeutic to all sciences and consequently cannot know what belongs
to each in particular.
Method is the unity of a whole of cognition according to principles. A
unity of cognition can be empirical, which experience teaches, insofar as it
is in accordance with purpose, i.e., is a unity" in accord with rules that can*
be drawn from experience. But there is also a unity in accordance with
universal principles of experience, where we can produce a thoroughgoing
connection, and can produce a system, in that we discover the nature of
the whole' through the connection of the manifold. Insofar as the unity of
cognition rests on empirical rules, it is called manner[,] in Latin modus.
But the unity of the manifold insofar as it rests on principles of reason is
called method/ There must be a certain connection of cognitions in that
they constitute a whole[;] there must be a rule of unity. If mere modernity
is the rule of unity, then it is called fashion, where the rule is accepted by
the multitude. Horace says, You should be suaviter in modo, i.e., pleasant
in manner, sedfortiterin re,i.e., thorough in method.** The first is aesthetic
perfection, the second logical. Both perfections concern manner, basically. One can have a thoroughness insofar as experience has instructed us
thereof, or one can have a thoroughness according to principles, and we
wish now to treat of this latter,' namely, of method. Methodically observed
is something different from methodically expounded. One can distinguish
method or the mode of cognition from exposition or style. The mode of
cognition is that mode of connection of cognition-^whose unity constitutes
the cognition itself. How is the nature of the manifold in a cognition to be
made more comprehensible and broken into sections[;] these two expressions are often confused. One needs method for thought, style for exposition. It is not a matter of indifference how one expounds, but the most
1 Reading "nur" for "mich," with Finder.
* Reading "Methodenlehre" for "Methode Lehre," with Finder.
' Reading "d.i. eine Einheit" for"die eine Erkenntnis," with Finder.
* Reading "können" for "köne," with Finder.
' "die ArtdesGantzen."
' "methodus, Lehrart."
' Reading "von dieser letzten" for "von diesen letzten," with Finder.
^ Reading "Erkenntnis" for "Einheit," with Finder.
416
important thing is how one is to think[.] The method of thought has to be
grounded on certain cognitions that are suited to the cognition of unity.
Some have thought well as to method but did not have the talent of
exposition, which belongs more to aesthetic perfection[,] really not 115
to ... ,'4 but belongs instead to exposition, the way I make a cognition
simple, that is, make* clear and lively what I have thought through the
understanding and reason, and excite an interest in it. Eloquence concerns exposition only in regard to language and in regard to grammatical
laws. Oratory is the art of speaking and making an illusion* in order' to
persuade someone else. Exposition[,] ratio dicendi,1is the art of expressing
something, of thinking in a way that is adequate to method. Style is
frequently nothing but a trick that amounts to nothing but pleasing the
ears[;] exposition, however, is a wonderful thing[;] here there can also be
aesthetic perfection, which agrees, however, with logical perfection. A
preacher must observe method, in that he* makes a selection from the
connection of his dogmatic propositions and makes these comprehensible. When he has sought out such propositions and seen to it that they are
comprehensible propositions and not abstract ones, then he looks to see
that his exposition is uniform, for if artificial it would not be in accord with
the dignity of a holy discourse. But the exposition must nonetheless exhibit the matter in a brighter light, so that the healthy eyes of the common
understanding also comprehend it, otherwise such an exposition would
not be worthy of religion. Toward this end read Demosthenes. Cicero
shows an affected taste and art of speaking. One forgets this if the exposition has energy[;] then we are charmed and transported by the exposition.
Where man is merely entertained, it is not an exposition[;] that is a
game[;] but where man is also instructed, that is an exposition.
Method can be critical, scholastic, also popular. In scholastic' method
the exposition is composed methodically[,] i.e., where the parts of the
method, and meticulousness of observation, shine forth. This method
reigns in all the sciences. Popular method does not have the purpose of
furthering science but instead of furthering interest, without aiming at
knowledge. It is distinct from1" scholastic method, then. As far as the
popular is concerned, one has to attend to the fact that popular exposition
and popular method are not the same. The exposition can be popular, but
not the method. E.g., Gottsched's compendium's is popular[,] but its
1 Reading "mache" for "machen," with Finder.
Reading "einen Schein" for "ein Schein," with Finder.
Reading "um . . . zu Überreden" for "ohne ... zu Überreden," with Finder.
;
manner of speaking.
Reading "indem er aus dem Zusammenhang" for "indem er aus dem er aus dem
Zusammenhang," with Finder.
Reading "scholastischen" for "Socratischen," with Finder.
Reading "von" for "vor," with Finder.
417I M M A N U E L KANT
method is scholastic. The French all have popular exposition. Accordingly, popular method needs to regard" not merely exposition but also
order, so that one knows where one is to stop and where to start. Not
everyone can combine such lucid exposition with simplicity, as, e.g., Voltaire and Fontenelle do. In a philosophical encyclopedia there should not
be merely a rhapsody of philosophical propositions, but rather a popular"
exposition of philosophy. There has never been a lack of those who have
thought about making method popular, and yet preachers need nothing in
the world more than popularity, namely, the way of ordering thought so
that it becomes popular. A treatise on method would put the crowning
touch on the world. Cartesius sketched a treatise, which is affected/
however. To discover this will be most difficult, but then it will order all
our cognitions and lead us to discoveries.
In the case of the method of cognitions of reason, concepts are taken as
the basis, with cognitions of experienceyarta are[;] if historical cognition is
to constitute a science it has to be a system, and as a system it needs a
method, although*the things themselves are not grounded on reason. The
order in the exposition must be related to grounds/ however. The method
of cognition of reason is scientific,1 however, if it is scholastic, if the form
of this science shines forth distinctly, so that the science has a principal
purpose, to which one attends. This is distinct from popular method.
Where I expound cognition in such a way that it is to be of universal use,
then I do not make use of scientific method, but rather of a different one,
in which things scholastic' are not so evident. For then scientific form is
surrounded by a wall, so that it accommodates universal taste and becomes popular. Scientific form in metaphysics does not really accord with
present taste, but if it deals with nature or reason it is much needed. In
short, there is no science that does not need to be expounded scientifically, although subsequently I can hide the scientific form somewhat if I
wish to accommodate others.
Scientific method is divided into synthetic" and analytic method. With
synthetic method one begins with principles of reason and proceeds toward things that rest on principles[;]1 with analytic method one proceeds
toward principles from things that rest on principles.* Synthetically, I
" Reading "anzusehen" for "angesehen werden."
° Reading "ein populärer Vortrag" for "ein pulaerer Vortrag," with Finder.
f Reading "gesucht" for "versucht," in accordance with Finder's suggestion; but the
reading is uncertain.
* Reading "oblgleich" for "daß obgleich," with Finder.
' Reading "Gründe" for "Grund," with Finder.
1 Reading "scientifisch" for "synthetisch," with Finder.
' "die Schule."
" Reading "synthetische" for "scientifische," with Finder.
" "zu den Principiaten."
01 "von den Principiaten."
418
begin with definitions and proceed to axioms, corollaries, with all their
consequences[;] thus this method, when I proceed from the simple to the
composite, is synthetic. Analytic method is always combined with popularity,1 for one gets used to abstract cognitions^ when one ascends to principles rather than having to begin with them. Syndietic method is the most
perfect of all[;] but when I accommodate myself to the capacity of other
men, then I begin with their common concepts, seek a rule based on
these, then seek to draw a common prindpium, and thus I climb from
lower cognitions to high ones. When one has climbed by analysis to
abstract cognitions2 then one can cognize them much more easily in 116
concrete. For one need only attend to the cognition that one had previously
taken as ground. Analytic method is also a means of discovery and of
exposition," in that I speak popularly. The true method of exposition is
synthetic, however, for even if I have thought the thing analytically, the
synthetic method is what first makes it a system. All cognitions must be
systematic, however, because I cannot myself know whether I have a
complete whole, for one member in the system serves to justify the correctness of the other and to rectify it.
The author distinguishes art and science from one another. Art means
an ability to do/ science means knowledge/ Many a man knows something but cannot bring into being what he knows. Many a man can do
something but does not have the relevant knowledge^ he cannot make
distinct and comprehensible the way that he brings it into being. The
common man says: This is not art but science, i.e., if one knows, then one
has the ability. But art requires that one actually be able to do what one
knows, then one has the ability. But art requires that one actually be able
to do what one knows, too. There are many arts that are far removed from
sciences, and which men cannot make into science. E.g., people always try
to make the art of painting, music, into a science. Art is concerned with
completion, science with the content of cognition. People divide the arts
into bread-winning arts and liberal arts/ [They are called] bread-winning
arts insofar as their worth does not lie in the arts themselves, but instead
they are regarded as a means of commerce[;] certain arts can be encouraged' in such a way, and thus some arts are treasured because they
nourish us, and just for this reason other arts enjoy no great esteem. The
liberal arts have an inner worth, without serving for gain[.] E.g., the art of
Reading "Mit der Popularitaet" for "Bey der Popularitaet," with Finder.
J "Kentnißen."
"Kentnissen."
Reading "des Vertrags" for "Vertrags des Vortrags," with Finder,
"ein könen."
"ein wißen."
"in Brodt und freye Künste."
Reading "encouragiert" for "ancuragirt," with Finder.
419
the carpenter, of the builder, are arts for earning one's bread[;] other arts
have a worth in themselves. E.g., poetry, oratory. These have an immediate pleasantness in themselves and need no auctoramentum[;Y these are
liberal arts, because they have an inner worth by themselves. If liberal arts
are used as arts for earning one's bread, then their inner worth, i.e., their
dignity, is^ degraded. One gives them the worth of a means, although they
have an unconditioned worth. In this way poetry often loses its prestige.
Nonetheless, the art of poetry can well be used for gain.
The author distinguishes natural from artificial method. But every*
method is artificial, namely, an artificial way of combining cognitions.
This is a tautology. But we can distinguish natural from affected1 method,
methodus affectata, in which one merely wishes to show his art, but which is
not suited-' to the character of the cognitions. Man is affected when he
shows an art that is not suited to the end. A method is natural, however,
that is in conformity with ends. Many ponder over things with so much
labor, not in order to reach the end, but rather in order to show their art.
This includes, for example,* verses that can be read backwards and forwards, also affected sermons[;] nothing should be affected, however, consequently no method, either.
Syllogistic exposition is where one expounds a cognition through a
whole chain of episyllogisms[;] this is, as it were, a way of spelling out our
reason, and it can only be used in the beginning, in order to make it
attentive to all of reason's steps. By tabular method one can show a system
in all its connection, as the anatomicus shows the skeleton of the body in
accordance with all its articulation.
Method is divided into acroamatic and erotematic method. It is
acroamatic if I merely imagine a listener[;]' it is erotematic if at the same
time I ask questions, since from the asking a conversation finally comes
about; thus the erotematic method can also be called dialogic. Dialogues
are either Socratic or catechistic. The method in an examinatorio would be
wholly erotematic, but in the case of the dialogic, questions alternate. In
Socratic method the one who asks questions is the teacher, but one must
presuppose of him who asks that he does not know what he asks, for
otherwise he would not be permitted to ask questions[;] or, one can also
117 ask others, in that someone must render an account of what he has
learned. In genuine dialogue, however, the one who asks questions is
always the one who learns. But in the case of our catechism, the child is
f
wages.
1 Reading "wird" for "wiird," with Finder.
* Reading "eine jede" for "eine."
' "gekünstelten."
' "angemessen."
* Reading "zum Beispiel" for "zum Beweise," with Finder.
' "wenn ichnur einen bloßen Zuhörer vorstelle."
420
the one who learns, which is backwards; if it is a matter of a historical
cognition, then it is all right, of course, for there there are concepts of
memory, which I examine. In the case of cognitions of reason, however,
where one does not proceed historically, that catechistic method is completely contrary to the end. Hence it is used completely wrongly in religion, since one transforms a cognition of reason in a historical cognition.
In himself, man does not become smarter in religion, because here everything is cognitions of reason and nothing"1 depends on facta. Thus the
catechistic method is natural insofar as the pupil is supposed to acquire
actual concepts. One can catechize the historical[;] this belongs to revealed religion[;] but in religion one must" also have reason, consequently
the erotematic method that is catechistic is wholly inappropriate in the
case of cognitions of reason. The teacher asks questions of the one who is
learning things that he did not think out, and yet he has to say to him in a
determinate terminus what he has committed to memory[;] consequently it
is mere memory work. What belongs in place of catechistic0 method is the
Socratic method[;] on this, read Gedike's translation of 4 Platonic conversations.16 Socrates speaks of matter of reason. Now he asks questions of
his followers as one who really does not know the thing, and as if he were
learning from the otherf;] but what matters in this connection is that he
knows'1 how to ask so cleverly[;] he thereby developed the cognition that
lay in him. In the end the listener figured out everything by himself, so
that the teacher could even be completely ignorant and could learn with
the other, if only he knew how to ask questions well. One ought to treat
religion in this way with the pupil and draw out of him everything that lies
in him with regard to God and morality. For this is truly the erotematic
method[;] here the pupil commits nothing to memory, but instead learns
the order of his own reason, while the catechistic method, on the other
hand, is a mechanical thing, in which he has thought out nothing.
The distinction between geographical and historical method rests on
the fact that the one determines differences of space, the other differences
of time. -" '7
To meditate means not merely to think something out,' but also a reflection. All thought occurs tumultuously[;] afterward, however, I have to meditate with reflection. In thought one first proceeds tumultuously[;] afterward, when one has considered something, one then brings in an order
and connection, and thus there arises a universal and complete whole.
Among the termini technici are included the termini familiares[;]
Reading "nichts" for "nicht."
Reading "aber man muß" for "aber muß," with Finder.
Reading "der catechistischen" for "der kategorischen," with Finder.
p Reading "weißt" for "wißen."
* Reading "etwas ausdenken" for "etwas ausdeuten," with Finder.
Reading "Beim Denken" for "Beim meditiren," with Finder.
421I M M A N U E L KANT
these are expressions that cannot be understood, which one believes one
understands because one has used them so often.
Merchandising of words3 among the learned is where they sell merely
words instead of things[;] they are called on this account logodaedali,
because they only fabricate words.
A terminus inanis is one that has no meaning at all. A terminus
vagus' is one whose meaning is not determined exactly. Synonyma are
words that mean the same.
A homonym is a word that has various meanings. Experience" teaches
that there are not 2 synonyma in a language. One uses different words, of
course, but if one investigates them exactly, every word has a different
determination. It is pleasant thus to distinguish words in a language.
Reason has nothing at all to do with style, except with the purity of it.
For in the case of cognitions of reason, everything aims at attending to
precision and to the appropriateness1 of things to one another.
Speech means the aesthetic art, which is added to expression; the art of
giving the expression perfection. This requiresf:]
118 i. Being well spoken,"that one has a manifold of words in one's head.
2. Eloquence, i.e., style.
3. Oratory is an art of persuasion and of bringing someone else to possess a
cognition by speaking, without convincing him through reason. Men must not
be persuaded/ however, but convinced[.]
Didactic method7 involves the ability to descend and to ascend[.]z One
places oneself" in the middle[;] hence one must know how to raise oneself
to those who have more capacity, and how to descend*to those who have
lower capacities. To write thus is a great art[;] but the higher must have
more ability to ascend than to descend, without which it does not amount
to much[;] without this one does not lose much, either.18...
Disputations, whether they be carried out orally or in writing, always
have a status controversiae, where the sophisma ignorationis elenchi must be
avoided/
One can refute the opponent by an argument xat' avOQomov/ in that
* " Wortkrämerey."
' Reading "vagus" for "vastus," with Finder.
" Reading "Erfahrung" for "Erfindung."
' "Angemessenheit."
" "Die Beredheit."
* "beredt."
y Reading "In der didaktischen Methode" for "in der dialectischen," with Finder.
* Reading "condescendenz und coascendenz" for "condescendenz."
' Reading "steh sich" for "steh sich seinen Leser," with Finder.
* Reading "herabzulassen wissen" for "herablassen zu wissen," with Finder.
' Reading "vermieden" for"verneind," with Finder.
d based on the man.
422
I accept my opponent's opinion and from it infer something contrary to
him, or by an argument xat' aX.f|0eiav/ when I take as a basis something
that is true. Locke mentions in addition the following. E.g., the argumentum ad crumenam,1when I say that I betf that it is true. The argumentum
ad verecundiam,h when one says: You can hardly know better than Wolff
and Leibniz, i.e., than the learned.
One can also defend oneself by retorsiones[.} E.g., by the argumentum ab
adio or ab inuidia,' where one says what would arise from the thing if one
draws such consequences. Theologians make much use of these, and
from this the odium theologicum1 has arisen, when* one has a personal
hatred toward something and seeks to rally all men against him. Hence'
one must avoid this argumentum ab odio.
One defends oneself against this argument by apologies, which are a
defense against an insult.
Hechsel - Pomeranus
Finis
1782.
' based ontruth.
/
argument based onwealth.
g Reading "wette" for "wollte," with Finder.
* argument based on modesty (i.e., an appeal to authority).
' argument from hatred [or] from envy.
' theological hatred.
* Reading "enstanden, wenn" for "entstanden. Wenn," with Finder.
' Reading "sucht. Deshalb" for "sucht, deshalb," with Finder.
423PART III
The Dohna- Wundlacken logicLogic
according to
the lectures of Professor Kant
in the summer semester, 1792
The 2ßrd of April, 1792EXPLANATION OF SYMBOLS
Unreadable passages have been restored by conjecture and have been signified
regularly by "f", those passages for which no acceptable conjecture occurred to
me, by ". .. t"- All additions between the lines and in the margin, as well as the
appended notes, I have incorporated in the main text, although the various types of
additions are indicated by special signs: those written above the lines by "< >",
the marginal notes by "{ }",' the appended notes by "I {} I". Where I had to make
my own interpolations, in order to close small gaps in the manuscript, I have used
"I I". By this means I hope to a wide extent to be able to make the structure of the
original notebook obvious to readers.
A. Kowalewski, Immanuel Kant's Principal
Lectures on Philosophy, 1924, p. 52{FIRST HOUR, THE 23RD OF APRIL, FROM 7-8} 693
Prolegomena
{All things between heaven and earth occur and act according to rules,
e.g., bodies according to the laws of gravity.}
One must reflect on his thought, i.e., do it according to rules. Every
language is bound to certain particular rules. This is so above all in the
case of dead languages, where one can actually designate the rules. One
can also use the rules without actually giving them names. One learns"
these rules gradually through attempts. The first ones fail[;] finally one
attains skill. Among the rules of thought there are universal ones, which
apply to particular objects without distinction. Thus there are universal
rules of language, too. Such a grammar does not contain words, not a
copia vocabularum,b but rather only the form of language. We will be able to
represent to ourselves a universal doctrine <of thought>. This universal
doctrine of thought is called logic, doctrine of the understanding. It is a
preparation for thinking about objects.
The understanding is the faculty of thinking <of understanding something^ of rules, the power ofjudgment the faculty of subsuming, reason of
inferring what pertains to something <of having insight into it>. A rule is
a concept under which much, a manifold of representations, is contained.
We can distinguish:
i. the necessary' universal rules of thought, without distinction as to what it deals
with. If they were not universal they would not be necessary.
{2. the contingent ones.}
These rules concern only the form of all rules of thought.
{E.g. If men are mortal, then they must f have existed <once>, too. If
the one proposition is true, so too is the other. Such a judgment [is] a
hypothetical, conditioned judgment.}
The content of a cognition is the object or the matter and is distinguished from the form. A universal logic must abstract from all objects of
thought.
The necessary, universal rules of thought must be a priori, moreover,
not derived from experience. Everything that comes from experience <ex
"lernt {exercitat}."
a supply of words.
"notwendigen {necess.}."
431
cognitione oriuntur> is called empirical and is opposed to <transcenden-
694 tal> cognition a priori.We use empirical cognition^ to aid the latter, to be
sure. But that is never good[;] it is always better if one cognizes everything
from reason.
Logical rules are not ones according to which we think, but according
to which we ought to think. {Logic contains no matter at all, only form of
thought.} Logic must contain principles a priori. {Therefore logic is a
science and grammar is not,because its rules are contingent.} Hence every
logic in which rules from experience occur is no longer pure. {Rules
concerning the sensibly perfect are contained in aesthetics.}
That is universal''which is universal according to reason[;] empirically
universal, only insofar as it is always so in experience. Paedeutica (childrearing) {jtcuoetmxf|}. A doctrine concerning practice* is no longer pure
logic, but only its more refined employment, application. {A distinct concept is one, of whose marks I am conscious. Without these universal rules
(even if one is not conscious of them) thought in general is not possible -
therefore logic is a propaedeutic to all the sciences, the highest touchstone
that something conforms to the laws of the understanding.}All psychological observations must be excluded from <pure> logic. All rules that are
logically provable in general are in need of a ground from which they are
derived. Many propositions (e.g., that of contradiction) cannot be proved
at all, neither a priori nor empirically.
{Is there a natural logic? Logica est sdentia. Omnis scientia est artificialis.
Ergo-"}
A proof that is made fully a priori {at the same time intuitivelyf,] with
insight into necessity} is called a demonstration. Now what is not capable'
of any demonstration is empirical.
We can consider this science, whether it is doctrine or critique {-
depends on use -} or both together.
{Logic as doctrine can be called a canon of the understanding and of
reason. A canon is a demonstrated critique (in Greek [the word] indicates
a rule).}
Logic is a doctrine, it provides rules/ it is a demonstrated theory.
A doctrine {is a complex of rules, where the rules must precede the
product[.] (Critique is the use of the power of judgment, where the
product precedes the rule)[.]} [It] contains the ground for passing judgment as to whether something is true or false. It can have two uses, one
* "Kenntnis."
' "Universell."
^ "allgemein."
* "Uebungslehre."
* Logic is a science. Every true science is artificial. Therefore ...
' "fähig <dignum>."
' "sie gibt <praebet> Regeln an die hand."
432
only as critique, the other as organon. The first casef,] e.g., the doctrine of 695
taste, only critique {serves for passing judgment on something, e.g., a
poem}, does not teach us to make something tasteful ourselves. {Critique
requires that the product already be there, whereas technical rules can be
given in advance.}
Mathematics is a doctrine but at the same time an organon {through
which a cognition becomes possible as to content} of wide extent, namely,
e.g., arithmetic. Is logic also an organon?No, it serves only for critique, as
grammar does (which has much similarity with logic), from which one
really cannot learn the language[;] this also requires a wealth of words.
A doctrine is a demonstrated discipline {a system,* a principle of
production}. Logic does not suffice for an organon, it does not have
objects. When, notwithstanding, a logic is misused as an organon, it is
called dialectic. {The art of speaking about any objector» et contra. Reason
can deceive itself unintentionally when it oversteps the laws of logic.} If it
is to serve merely for passing judgment, however, then it is called analytic
or a logic of truth. Dialectic, on the other hand, [is] only a logic of illusion.
{The use of logic is analytical when it is used only as canon, dialectical
when it is also used as organon[;] then it is a logic of illusion and deceives
us. Logic as canon is called analytic (logic of truth). Zeno of Elea, a great
dialectician.}
{2ND HOUR}
To think is to represent something to oneself in a concept. Logic can be
called a doctrine of reason,' not just a rational doctrine1" {a science of
reason" as to matter," because its object is only human reason. Mathematics, physics, morals are also sciences of reason, to be sure, but only as to
form, not as to matter.} Logic is occupied only with the formal rules of
thought. {The object is the matter, the subject the form.}
Can instruction in the fine arts be doctrine? The rules of these arts can
serve only for passing judgment. Aesthetics allows no doctrine, only a
critique. Sciences, however, allow doctrine. Fine art has no rules as the
touchstone of correctness of the judgment of taste, but doctrine has rules.
By barbarism is understood not only the spread of total ignorance but
above all the corruption of taste, too. We would have to fear this if we did 696
not still have such excellent models from antiquity. {Namely, poets,
beaux-esprits/ e.g. Horace, etc. Taste can be cultivated and maintained
* "Institution."
"Vernunftlehre."
" "vernünftige Lehre."
"Vernunftwissenschaft."
' Reading "der Materie nach" for"nicht derMaterie nach."
p "schöne Geister."
433I M M A N U E L KANT
only through examples, not through rules. Note: Polyclitus, a famous
sculptor of antiquity, made a statue which was subsequently always used
as a model. Archetype,* lies in everyone's mind, which must approximate
to it.}
Fine art needs a model (exemplar), then, but not so science[;] it needs
rules. A doctrine, insofar as it can be demonstrated, is called a canon.
Logic is a canon, not only a critique[;] it is also only a means for passing
judgment. {A canon is an inviolable law. Thus it could not be brought
about in the case of taste, where everything depends on custom and the
satisfaction of others.}
Is logic as a canon also a means for acquiring science? No. Logic
abstracts from all content, hence also from all cognition, {it only makes
our thought be correct} and it is not an organon. But mathematics is not
only a canon but also an excellent organon. {Indeed, certainly the greatest
one, for it occupies itself with matter, with the measurement of time and
of space.} Natural science also involves mathematics.
Logic is divided, now,
1. into logica naturalis (natural) and (only a complement)
2. into logica artificialis (artificial). This is the logic that is the use of our understanding actually explicite not implicite. {Basically there is only an artificial
logic, for basically there is no natural logic - natural grammar.}
It is expounded (i.) scientifically, as a science is always expounded, (2.)
scholastically-popularly, with scholastic correctness, congruent with the
subjective ground of the faculty of cognition of everyone. {Popularity
begins with perfection.}r Every science must be expounded scholastically
correctly. This is a consequent of perfection.
Now we can divide logic into
1. the logic of the healthy understanding, sensus communis,
2. the logic of the speculative understanding!; this] gives rules in abstracto.
The common understanding is the faculty of being able to judge
according to rules in concreto. {Not the plain' [understanding]. This word
697 is absurd.}2 The common understanding is called healthy when it is
correct. Morals must be cognized wholly in concreto, but physics also has
abstraäa.
A logic ought to be expounded in abstracto. It is a propaedeutic {a
preparatory exercise for the sciences} to all the sciences, something that
concerns their content, e.g., in regard to physics and morals.
"Archetypon, Urbild."
Reading "geht von der Vollkommenheit aus" for "geht von der Vollkommenheit ab."
Reading "consequens" for "Konsequenz."
"der schlichte."
434D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
(3RD HOUR, THE 2ÖTH OF A P R I L, 1792}
Can it also be <regarded> as a propaedeutic to philosophy? No. For it is
itself a part of philosophy, {and in fact the part with which we are supposed to begin}, as we will soon hear.
All our cognition is either (as to its mode of acquisition)
1. rational, insofar as it is derived a priori from reason (e.g., pure mathematics,
metaphysics),
2. historical!;] as such it is:
a) subjectively historical, when the cognition in the subject rests on
empirical grounds;
b) objectively historical, when the ground of cognition can never be
other than historical. Cognitions that are <objectively> rational can nonetheless be subjectively historical. {Logic itself is a system. Cognitions that
conform to it are partly systematic, partly fragmentary. - Opposed to methodical cognition is tumultuous cognition.} In madiematics there can be a
subjectively historical cognition, even if it is certainly objectively rational,
which occurs above all in the case of surveying. Also, unfortunately, in the
case of natural religion {which many believe merely out of lazy trust in the
reason of others, in order not to rack their brains. If they forget the words,
then the thing is forgotten too.}
{What is philosophy?} All cognition of reason is either (i.) a cognition
through concepts, (2.) one through construction of concepts. The latter is
called exhibiting" a concept. This is a cognition of reason only insofar as
the concepts correspond with one another a priori <in intuition>. A
cognition of reason through concepts is called philosophical. Thus a system through concepts is philosophy.
{To construct a concept is to give it a corresponding intuition a priori]
A cognition of reason through construction of concepts is called mathematical. Thus a system mathematics.
A system must always be thought through, a manifoldness in connection, a combination of cognitions based on a common1' principle. Hence 698
we can learn much geography, but not in a system, only as an aggregate.
The philosopher can be considered as {an} artist of reason1" and teacher of
wisdom. Philosophy <in the practical sense> is the science of the final
ends of human reason. Philosophy as art of reason* is called speculative,
as doctrine of wisdom7 practical. The ancients always called philosophy
the doctrine of wisdom.
"darstellen, exhibere."
"gemeinschaftlichen."
"Vernunftkünstler."
"Vernunftkunst."
' "Weisheitslehre."
435
(4TH HOUR, THE
One can make a distinction between the two expressions, to learn philosophy and to learn to philosophize. To learn is to imitate the judgments of
others, hence is quite distinct from one's own reflection. {Not to learn
philosophy - but rather to learn to philosophize, otherwise it remains only
imitation —but to attain it oneself through exercise of the understanding,
that is what matters. Only he who is capable of the self-use of his reason is
called a philosopher. Philosophy is scientific cognition in abstracto —it is
itself science.} To learn to philosophize means one must learn to use his
reason himself, and here of course there is a use of healthy and of speculative reason. We must exercise it in concepts. Practical cognition, insofar as
our understanding aims at cultivation and an end; and practical reason is
the final end of human Iwisdoml. Philosophy as doctrine of wisdom presupposes a teacher of wisdom. The ancients demanded of a teacher of
wisdom that he also be a wise man in practice. {Wisdom is agreement with
the final ends of all things. All other cognitions have their value only as
means - only philosophy leads to the ultimatefinal end- wisdom. (The
doctrine of the highest good.) Philosophy - love for wisdom.} The cynics
{the name derives from kynosarges? a building where they customarily
met} took the short way, as they called it, to happiness, by practicing being
able to do without everything.
Now we wish to speak somewhat of philosophy as a complex of cognitions, and of its history.
The first philosophers were poets. It took time, namely, to discover
words for abstract concepts[;] hence in the beginning supersensible
thoughts were represented in sensible images. Pherecydes first wrote
699 philosophy in prose. {The founder of the Ionian school is Thales. The
Eleatic school included Parmenides, Xenophanes. On account of the
poverty of language, one could only philosophize in poetry at that time.}
The most famous sect is the Platonic one, then the Aristotelian. The
latter were called peripatetici" {they spent their time in the Lyceumf;] this
was a colonnade where things were taught ambulandob}[\\ the former [were
called] Academics. The Stoics <under Zeno of Citium> got their name
from oTod, porticus.' The Epicureans - (horti1*) {Epicurus taught there}.
The so-called Academy (i.e., Plato's school) was in the beginning
wholly dogmatic, but it degenerated later into addiction to doubt,' skeptiS; a gymnasium for those who were not pure Athenians.
From jiEQiJiaiETLXoi, ones who walk around,
while walking.
Both words mean "porch."
gardens.
"Zweifelsucht."
436D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
cism. Carneades cannot be regarded as the founder of a new school but
only as an extraordinary orator. Arcesilaus founded a new one, however.
{Anaxagoras was the first philosopher who also taught theology.} The
ancients divided the whole of philosophy into three parts, namely, logic,
physics, and ethics. But one must still consider whether a dichotomy
would not be better here than a trichotomy. {Practical Iphilosophyl: (i.)
Ethical[;] Socrates never purported to be a philosopher. His fragmentary
doctrines were brought into a system by Plato. (2.) Political, rules of
prudence, Pythagoras. With respect to him everything still lies in obscurity. A term of the subdivision enters into the superdivision.}
We have now actually divided philosophy into:
1. formal philosophy[;] this is logic.
2. material philosophy. This can be divided into theoretical and practical.
Ethics in modern times has been called the doctrine of virtue. Physics
can also be considered in two ways.
1. Asphysica rationalis, pure doctrine of nature {pure is the opposite of empirical}
[;] since Aristotle this is called metaphysics.
2. Asphysica materialis[,] or as metaphysics and empirical physics. Any cognition
is pure when there is no influence of empirical cognitions^in it.
Physica empirica can be divided again
1. into the doctrine of bodies, physica spedalis f and
2. into the doctrine of soul, psychologia spedalis tIf we regard philosophy as the complex of several sciences, then first we
want to look at the 7 so-called liberal arts:* (i.) grammar, (2.) rhetoric, (3.)
dialectic, (4.) arithmetic, (5.) music, (6.) geometry, (7.) astronomy. {This 700
division was made by Rabanus Maurus (at the time of Charlemagne) on
behalf of theology. - At that time all the sciences were divided into A) a
higher faculty: (i.) preservation of blessedness/ (2.) of freedom and of
property, (3.) oflife and health, of esse in general; B) melius esse, the lower
faculty}.3
"Kenntnisse."
g "freien Künste."
"Seligkeit."
437HOUR, THE 3<DTH OF APRIL}
Traäatio ipsa
Logic is the science that contains the formal rules and principles of
thought. It is customarily divided into:
1. theoretical logic,
2. practical logic[;] but there is no such division, for in that case it would have to
be applied to objects, which is not the case at all, however, for it contains only
the formal rules of thought.
One can I divide I it rather into:
1. the doctrine of elements[; this] contains rules in general,
2. the doctrine of method[; this] contains the principles of science.
The doctrine of method is the complex of cognitions,' insofar as they
are made into a system {- It contains directions for the way in which a
system of cognition is to be attained}. It constitutes the so-called practical
part.
In the history of logic the most outstanding phenomenon is where it
battled with itself as to whether any cognition is certain. He who believed
that it could be completely proved was called a dogmatist, but the doubters were called skeptics. {Skeptics wanted to prove that one cannot attain
certainty about anything at all, and thus they fell into contradiction with
themselves - a cathartic, which annuls itself. - Their acuity, with which
they attacked the scholastics, is admirable.} They were in the end a valuable sect. {Pyrrho was the earliest of all the skeptics - later Arcesilaus,
Carneades.}
We have no one who has exceeded Aristotle or enlarged his <pure>
logic (which is in itself fundamentally impossible) just as no mathematician has exceeded Euclid.
I {Something about the history of logic. The Greeks, among all oriental
peoples, have the greatest merit for developing philosophy. Subsequently
its study declined almost wholly in the time of the middle ages, until in the
701 12th century the scholastics arose in Paris. Actually all their distinctions
concerned only theology, hence also the many useless rules and barbaric
expressions here.-' In the end people made do with digging the ancient
' "Kenntnissen."
' Ak, "daher auch"; MS and Ko, "daher auch hier."
438
authors out of the scholastic chaos and the ruination of language that
<resulted> from it. - Locke became famous through hisEssay Concerning
Human Understanding— he speaks there of the origin of concepts, <but>
this really does not belong to logic, but rather to metaphysics. The result of
his investigations: Everything derives from experience. But it does not
follow at all from this that concepts can be displayed only in experience. -
Then Leibniz entered the picture. Although actually having written no
logic, he nonetheless did much to illuminate concepts (he wrote in defense
of his countrymen against the Englishman Locke). In his works he expressed ideas which subsequently moved Wolff to his system. Thorough
description of this is to be found in Reusch, Systerna logicae,* and in Corvinus.s Crusius6 provides much nourishment for the understanding.} I
A principal point in logic will rest on the criterion of truth. Now we
begin.
439/. The doctrine of elements
{It treats the concepts of the understanding in general. The division of all
thought - which has various forms that may be exhausted and brought
into a system. The general thing that lies at the basis of all cognition is
representation —a fundamental concept that cannot be explained. Cognition
is relation of representation to an object - combined with an actio in the
mind - consciousness (representation of our representation), which is
lacking in obscure representations.}
The ancients divided it into (i.) apprehensio simplex, (2.)judicium, and
(3.) mtiocinium.k Our cognition involves two things, intuition and concept.
Representations can also be related to something other than cognition,
namely, to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure (the way in which we are
affected by things). All our intuition belongs to sensibility, every concept
to the understanding. Sensibility contains twofaculties, sense and imagina-
702 tion {this is the magical power of the human spirit}, or the faculty for
intuition of an object insofar as it is not present[;] but sense is that faculty
insofar as the object is present.
{All our representation is (i.) sensation - its relation to the subject,
(2.) cognition - relation to the object, (i.) e.g., pleasure - lies merely in
me - notin the object.}
Of the consciousness of representation, or apperception
This is the faculty of representation in relation to an object {that belongs
to our condition}, which in the case of apprehension is still not present at
all, but instead is, as it were, produced <grasped'>. In the thought that
man can say, I think - there lies exceptionally much. Consciousness of our
concepts is always hard. {It is required above all for concepts. Due to the
lack of consciousness, even animals are not capable of any concept -
intuition they do have. - Consciousness is a wholly separate dimension of
the faculty of cognition (therefore gradation from animals to man does not
occur).}A concept contains what is universal for many <(various)> representations. A concept is called
* (i.) simple apprehension, (2.) judgment, and (3.) inference.
' "gegriffen."
440
clear, of which one is conscious. (The savage would ask, What is a
house?)
distinct, when one is conscious not only of the total concepts but also of
the partial concepts."1 We need distinctness in all concepts that we wish to
communicate to others. One cannot demand <distinctness> of any concept that contains no manifoldness (partial representations). E.g., time.
{With this concept one can only demand clarity - it is only a simple
representation.}
When a representation that is clear as a whole is obscure particulariter,
then it is indistinct. {Indistinct representations are called confused." But
actually they come from the weakness of the representation. If there is
order in (representations!, however, then it arises out of confusion. Only
when the representation is composite can it be confused.} Concepts of
which one is not conscious are obscure. It holds, however, only for obscure representations. These are either
1. merely clear, and then either
a) simple or
b) composite, or
2. merely distinct. This distinctness is 703
a) distinctness of intuition,
b) distinctness of concepts. (In the author, only this latter appears, but the
corresponding intuition, exhibition," is just as necessary.)
{Order in representations and concepts is of the greatest importance.
There are three relations:
1. subject to predicate,
2. dividing members to the divided concept,
3. the relation of ground to consequence.}
Not even philosophers have succeeded in wholly explicating the concept of virtue. One has it in oneself but cannot express it. -
{ÖTH HOUR, THE 1ST OF MAY}
§ 15 and § 16 in our author do not really belong to logic at all. {P. 11. 12}?
§ 17. Rational cognition, a distinct way of cognizing something from
grounds. A cognition from concepts is really cognition of the understanding. To think means to represent something to oneself discursive^, it is]
distinguished from intuition, to represent something to oneself intuitive^.
Reason, the faculty of inferringf;] this involves judgments, and these cannot occur f without concepts. Receptivity*1 is distinct from spontaneity
{self-activity}. Understanding is the higher faculty of cognition. {It is,
" Reading"Totalbegriffe . . . Teilbegriffe" for "Teilbegriffe . . . Totalbegriffe."
"verworrene <konfuse>."
"Darstellung, exhibitio."
' "Die Empfänglichkeit, Receptivität."
441
namely, the faculty of rules[,] and these are already concepts.} Then one
comes from representations to concepts <facultas concept. .. >, then to
judgments, then to inferences.
{The higher faculty of cognition contains:
1. understanding,
2. power of judgment,
3. reason.}
The understanding is the faculty of representation of the universal as
such. {E.g., definition of man in general.}
The power of judgment is the faculty of representing the particular as
contained under the universal {Caius is a man}[,] or the faculty of
subsumption.
Reason is the faculty of the derivation of the particularfrom the universal or
704 cognition a priori. {All men are mortal. Sempronius is a man, too.
Sempronius is mortal.
In \hefirst two, understanding and power of judgment, one can teach, in
the latter only practice.}
The definition of logic, cognitio rationalist is not the best[; it] could only
hold if it has for its object the use of the rules of the understanding and of
reason.
All cognition must be rational/ The author should say, then, cognition
of reason/ Now what is not cognition of reason is historical cognition, rests
on empirical grounds. {Scientific cognition is that of which rules in abstracto are possible. Cognition is common insofar as it is not scientific.}
One must exert oneself to learn to philosophize, not merely to learn
philosophy. For if we did the latter our cognition would be merely historical
and not drawn from ourselves. A complex of cognitions as a system is a
science, and here a main principle, from which everything else is derived,
also lies at the basis. A cognition is called common insofar as it is not
science. It can sometimes be very vast, but has no system, no unity of the
whole. He who possesses such a cognition is opposed to him who has
science not as to matter but as to form. Indeed, as to matter he can even
be richer, but everything is thrown together randomly. We may count
philosophical cognition a part of learnedness, insofar as we provide a
philosophical history of what all philosophers ever have said. But he who
can do this is not on that account a philosopher. One is this only when one
can philosophize. Historical cognition as science is learnedness. A teacher
of reason' can be a philosopher or a madiematician. He who possesses all
historical cognition as a science is called a polyhistor.
* rational cognition.
' "Vernünftig."
* "Vernunfterkenntnis."
' "Vernunftlehrer."
442D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
In the concept of the philosopher one can think a twofold distinction:
(i.) as artist of reason, (2.) as wise man or legislator.
Philosophy proper (which should not be merely an art of reason) includes nothing but metaphysics and morals. These serve as means for
cognizing our existence as rational beings and for cognizing the ultimate
end, our aim {- the highest good -}, the most sublime that we have.
From this it becomes clear that the physicist does not have a science at all, 705
although one always counts physics among the sciences.
Our author treats now
Of beautiful cognition
{There really is no beautiful cognition." In cognition it is only a matter of
the relation to the object - if it is met with, then it is true, but only the
exhibition can be beautiful.
Sensibility is the faculty of intuition:
A. sense, faculty of intuition in the present,
B. imagination, faculty of intuition in the absence of the object.}
If I call something beautiful, then I thereby express my satisfaction, my
pleasure (the relation of the object to the subject, which produces a
pleasant representation, which determines the mind itself to the preservation of that representation) in the object. The basis of the definition. In
everything beautiful we understand only relation of cognition to the subject, not to the object itself. E.g., in the description of beautiful objects
one describes only how one is affected by them. One cannot possibly
depict the object itself. There simply is no beautiful cognition, then.
{yTH HOUR, THE 3RD OF MAY}
Perfection is divided into
1. logical perfection in the agreement of the faculty of cognition with the object,
2. aesthetic perfection!;] I it 1consists in the agreement of the object with the
subject's faculty of cognition.
{Aesthetic perfection is the subjective agreement of the understanding
with sensibility - which enlivens the representation of an object. Because
the agreement is only subjective, it will also be possible only through
sensation. A feeling of pleasure arises with this[,] just as a feeling of
displeasure does in the sensation of opposition.}
Imagination and understanding are the only two active faculties of
cognition of the human mind. But the senses are wholly passive, they 706
necessarily require an object[;] imagination provides objects for itself.
* "Schönes Erkenntnis."
443
All our cognitions involve the following two things {two elements, one
of which without the other yields no cognition}:
1. intuition (the interpretation" of the concept, of thought);
2. concept. Apure concept like a pure rule does not yet yield any distinctness of cognition[;] this requires intuition, too. Conversely, intuition without concept is likewise nothing. For without [a concept] it would be as if it
had seen nothing. E.g., tasteful poetic descriptions of regions, which produce only intuition, do not serve at all for cognition, are only cosmetic.
If I look only to beauty, however, then I do not demand instruction but
only pleasing entertainment. This satisfaction can excite the mind itself[;]
in that case it remains in spontaneity. Taste is supposed to be the faculty of
taking satisfaction in the object on the basis of the subjective agreement of
the powers of cognition.
{Since beauty can never be cognized through concepts, only through
feeling, but this is not as communicable as concepts, which, since they
deal with the object, [and are] the same in all subjects - no objective rules
concerning it may be given, then. Nonetheless the beautiful is distinct
from the pleasant through the fact that the former holds for all with
subjective universality, while the latter reaches only to individualsubjects.
With matters of the pleasant one will not demand that anyone make the
same judgment - as in the case of objects of the beautiful, where the
judgment of taste is universallyvalid. - The aesthetically beautiful is not to
be elucidated through rules but merely through examples - hence the
worth of the classical authors.}
In regard to satisfaction in objects, cognition is of two kinds.
1. The beautiful[;] the faculty of distinguishing the beautiful is called taste.
2. The sublime[;] the faculty of distinguishing Ithe sublimel is called feeling.
Taste belongs to the power of judgment. For it is not lal means for
producing objects but only for passing judgment on them.
Now the power of judgment is also of two kinds:
i. logical,
707 2. aesthetic. The latter is taste {understanding in union with imagination}. An empirical judgment is produced through the immediate impression that the Representation of the> object makes on our mind,
produces {in regard to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure}. The
logical power of judgment always has established rules. But those of the
aesthetic power of judgment rest only on empirical grounds. To quarrel
about the pleasure that arises from the senses (e.g., to be astonished that
sauerkraut does not taste good to someone else) would be quite foolish.
Hence in this case the proverb, Chacun a son gout," would be correct if it
"die Interpretation."
French: Each to his own taste.
444
had this meaning. But since this is not so {for here we do not understand
by taste the stimulation of the palate but rather the aesthetic power of
judgment}, then it is false in every other respect. For taste is the aesthetic
power of judgment and is universally valid. This can put us on the trail of
where taste is really to be posited. {Everything that belongs to sensation is
subjective, everything that belongs to intuition objective.} Everything that
does not rest on the relation of our faculty of representations to the object,
but rather to the subject, to the representing faculty, is aesthetic. Insofar as
we find imagination and understanding enlivened harmoniously through a
certain feeling, we have taste. {The freedom of imagination agreeing with
the concept of the understanding. Without the former, which gives it
intuition, the latter would accomplish nothing - the object would disappear for it. The understanding comes to the aid of imagination and brings
uunity into its products.}
\{Taste is art. The understanding and imagination, which have to unite
in this, are like two friends, who cannot stand each other and yet cannot
part from each other - for they live in perpetual strife and yet are mutually indispensable. As follows from the above, there are no beautiful
sciences/ but only an art of the beautiful. In order to produce it, genius is
required - e.g., a good poem cannot be ordered, it comes about only
when the poet has the mood - the fortunate disposition of the mind -
for it[;] rules are not enough for this. There are poets rather than rules
for poetry.}!
{STH HOUR}
The logical perfection of representations consists in the fact that they
represent particular representations as in the universal {- or formal 708
completeness is the requisite for logical perfection (as material is for
aesthetic) - it seeks out the particular under the universal.} But in the
case of the aesthetic it is just the converse. There, that is, universal
representations are represented in the particular. In a logical judgment,
then, I look then only to the fact that particular representations are
represented in the universal. {With aesthetic judgment, again, it is just
the converse.} Logical perfection requires bringing intuition to concepts,
aesthetic perfection bringing concepts to intuition. Logical perfection
consists in the agreement of cognition with the object, aesthetic perfection in that with the subject and its faculty of cognition.
Our author opposes ugliness <deformitas> to beauty {ugliness is just as
positive as beauty - an object that I hate, the maximum disgust}[;] but
there is a middle term, dryness <jejunum> {it is a grade of perfection that
madiematics possesses, because it has dryness}, and in fact dryness and
* "schönen Wissenschaften."
445
beauty can exist together {e.g., in a sermon which begins dryly but contains many beauties in what follows.}
Beauty can only concern exhibition, intuition, not really the concept.
The great business of propagation extends throughout the whole of
nature. - The expression[,] beautiful cognitiont,]7 is not fitting at all.
The faculties of our mind may be brought into the following three
classes:
1. faculty of cognition,
2. feeling of pleasure and displeasure,
3. faculty of desire.
Our cognition is a representation, and
1. In relation to the faculty of cognition it is called logical perfection {in relation
to the understanding - truth is a judgment, not a feeling}.
2. In relation to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure it is called aesthetic
perfection {in relation to the power of judgment}.
3. That it agrees with our faculty of desire -practical perfection {in relation to
reason}.
709 Of the perfections of cognition
We can have perfection in cognition:
1. in quantity - universality -
2. in regard to quality - distinctness through concepts {i.e., through consciousness of marks},
3. in regard to relation - relation <of representation> to an object. Truth[,]
agreement of the judgment with the mode of thought. {Truth is here the
logical perfection.}
4. in regard to modality (rests on whether it is contingent or necessary). {Here it
is the necessity that is cognized a priori}
Logical perfection <as to quantity> consists in the universality of representations, that concepts become distinct. This universality wasobjective
{and aimed at representing the particular in the universal in abstracto —}.
But aesthetically it is subjective and this subjective universality is called
popularity. {Thus aesthetic perfection aims, on the contrary, at representing the universal in concreto —this [is] popularity- to make concepts of the
understanding congruent* with the sensus communis (i.e., with the healthy
common understanding. -}
The 2nd logical perfection is distinctness through concepts. This is
effected through few marks {in which I am conscious of the partial representations, too, however}; aesthetic distinctness [is effected] through
* "schöne Erkenntnis."
z "angemessen."
446
many marks. Logical distinctness arises from the fact that I represent little
in many things, aesthetic distinctness from the fact that I represent much
in <few>. Aesthetic distinctness is called liveliness in the combination of
many representations. For logical distinctness abstraction is required. Aesthetic [distinctness] involves a swarm of coordinate representations.
The 3rd perfection is relation to the object - truth {agreement with the
object}. That which holds according to appearance is aesthetically true -
the agreement of a judgment with the subject's mode of thought. Thus
the poet is concerned with universal illusion, with subjective truth. The
poetic is always true aesthetically, seldom logically. E.g., thunder rumbles.
{Truth is agreement of the judgment with the mode of thought.}
Now the 4th <perfection>. Modality rests on whether it is a necessary
or merely a contingent judgment. An aesthetic necessity, namely, [is]
when it is necessary to represent the thing in accordance with laws of
imagination, not according to laws of reason. Aesthetic necessity is only 710
subjective necessity. Aesthetic perfection is the understanding's condescension to sensibility.
{QTH HOUR}
An object is given through intuition, thought through concepts. When
intuition and concept agree, tending to enliven the cognition itself, then
they produce a satisfaction in us, and this is then called beautiful cognition."
One must exert oneself to get understanding and imagination to agree in
reference to a common enterprise. This is no longer play, however. With a
beautiful product a new cognition is not required, but onlythe enlivening of
the powers of cognition. Production of the beautiful is in general not science, but rather free play of imagination. Imagination and understanding
are two friends who cannot do without one another but cannot stand one
another either, for one always harms the other. The more universal the
understanding is in its rules, the more perfect it is,but ifit wants to consider
things in concreto then I it I absolutely cannot do without the imagination.
The imperfections of cognition are (i.) either imperfections of lack
(defectus) or (2.) imperfections of deprivation (vitiuni), better, of transgression (realm, tmnsgressio legis, it is reusk).s
{Ignorance resembles a tabula rasa - error a scribbled tablet. Here one
has in addition the labor of wiping away the false in order to come once
again to ignorance.
Truth Ignorance Error
+a oc -a}
"schönes Erkenntnis."
accusation, transgression of the law,[it is] the accused.
Reading "o" for "a."
447
For even if one does not say everything that is true, everything that one
says must still be true. Opposition is not only something negative, but
actually something positive, which in mathematics would have the minus
sign. E.g.,if a doctor does not merely Inotl replenish a sick man's lack of
health but wholly destroys it for him. From this we even see that among all
the imperfections of human existence one must protect oneself most of all
against that of opposition, because it has the horrible property not only of
not being valuable but even of damaging. For if one has learned some-
711 thing false, it costs unspeakable effort to transpose oneself once again into
the condition one was in, as if one knew nothing of it, so as to become
acquainted with the truth.
{IOTH HOUR}
Of the extensiveness of learned cognition
{The horizon is the complex of those cognitions that belong to a man's
end.}
Extensive cognition rests on manyness/ but intensive cognition on degree. The last is a quantity of unity. The first is called by the author
extensiveness of learned cognition.
Of the horizon of human cognition. - The horizon {horizon, the circle
that limits all objects} is the congruence <agreement> of the limits of any
cognition whatever with the limits of human perfection. This latter is
limited, would fall prey to chimeras if it were extended beyond the limits.
Nothing can be invisible to us beyond the horizon. Hence this way of
speaking is wrong. It is only what lies beneath our horizon that we cannot
know. We can divide our horizon:
{Only this belongs in our field. We divide: things that are beyond,
outside, and beneath our horizon - outside it, what we do not need to
know; beneath it, what we ought not to know. This is concerned with the
end, with the practical.}
1. logically, the determination of our logical horizon {- relation to the faculty of
cognition requires distinctness of abstraction. This would harm the imagination. Aesthetics needs only clarity, therefore}.
2. aesthetically, as to agreement with our taste.
3. practically, as to the congruence' of our cognition with our ends.
We can divide the logical horizon into:
i. the historical horizon, and it can be a) objective {e.g., natural history, history},
b) subjective.
' "Vielheit."
' "Angemessenheit."
448
2. the rational horizon {objectively rational, insofar as one can have insight into it
a priori}.
The historical horizon is incomparably more extensive than the rational
{either that of pure reason or metaphysics or (2.) that grounded on experience^] or physiology}. In mathematics the latter is the most extensive, in 712
philosophy the former. The field of mathematics is unsurveyable. Critique
is the determination of the <rational> horizon of human cognition.
{There is a universal horizon of the cognitions of the human race. The
horizon of human cognition that concerns experience is called physics.
Physics also has its limits, insofar as we do not have insight with reason as
to whence this or that object comes.}
To determine the rational horizon of human cognition is one of the
noblest and hardest occupations of the human spirit. Here metaphysicians
usually goastray. - Only metaphysics or its <foundation, the> critique of
pure reason[,] can show where the limits of reason begin and where all its
faculty ceases. One can occupy oneself Iwithl the universal horizon of
humanity and [also] treat the individual man. It is maintained by some,
quite without right, that there are certain cognitions we can know, but
Itheyl would not be of value to us. {Many cognitions and sciences would
not have reached the [current] level if one had asked right at the beginning about their use. This often shows itself only when they have attained
perfection.} Quaerit delirus et non respondet Homerus/ The human race
must learn all cognitions useful to us {in order thereby to cultivate its
understanding. - No knowledge of any kind whatsoever can be wholly
contrary to ends (universally)}. Admittedly, something can perhaps be
dispensable for individual men. Men divide cognitions^ into various fields.
For each there are lovers, accordingly as they have inclinations toward this
thing or that.
{lITH HOUR, THE IOTH OF MAY}
{Further, one can divide the horizon of human cognition into:
1. the horizon of healthy reason,
2. of the sciences.}
In a certain way we can say that the beginning of the world is when the
art of writing arose. There are no cognitions* at all that we ought not to
know, for it is our duty, universally, to know everything if only we can
know it. But there are of course cognitions' that we can do without and
A madman asks and Homer does not reply.
"Kenntnisse."
"Kenntnisse."
"Kenntnisse."
449
therefore need not know {which are outside our horizon, according to the
explanation above} (as, e.g., the doctor can do without Hebrew. Hence
need not know it).
713 The manner in which cognitions^ are taught in universities is called
factory-like,* because there are many who work here communally on one
end.
Quantity of Cognition. Here it is not a matter of multitude but of degree.
{Non multa, sed multum.1 The external extensive quantity of cognition
indicates the universal extension of it among many men. - This is the
situation today — - Enlightenment —the degree of culture - which, according to the talents of the subject, makes man capable of his ends as man
and as citizen.}
Practical rules in regard to the horizon of human cognition. One must not
determine the horizon of one's cognition too early, for one does not know
for what one will have a particular talent in the future. Inclination can alter
even more. {First learn a great deal, in order then to see in what one takes
the most pleasure - but not in a desultory fashion - from one to the
other. - All study in accordance with rules cultivates the understanding -
hence grammar [is] valuable even to the future artist. Usually one learns to
act in conformity with, one even becomes acquainted with, his talents,
inclinations, and situation f only when it is too late.} But once one has
accepted the horizon of his cognition determinately, one must not alter it
easily. One must not measure the horizon of others by his own. Above all,
one must not call valueless what seems to us in a particular respect to be
dispensable. If people had always wanted to grasp value with their hands,
they would never have advanced in any science. Can there be things of
which one can say that we ought not"1 to know them? - Praiseworthy ignorance? Ignorance is never praiseworthy. {Thus there is an ignomtio
inculpabilis (inculpable), but never an ignomntia laudabilis} Not that, but
rather acquaintance with one's ignorance is praiseworthy {and it requires
much cognition"}. He who comes this far makes the step from the field of
science to the field of wisdom. Those who are inflated byconceit are usually
called idiots by others. Thus are men called who, even if they have many
cognitions" - still do not have sciencef;] he who does not have the former
either is called ignorant. In general, he who lacks knowledge'1 in regard to
the science from which he profits, is called ignorant.* - An idiot is to one
; "Kenntnisse."
* "fabrikenmäßig."
' Not many, but much.
™ Ak, "wollen"; MS and Ko, "sollen."
" "Kenntnis."
' "viel Kenntnisse."
p "unwissend ist."
* "Ignorant."
450D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
who knows much what the laicus is to the clericus or what the literatus, one
who can read and write,... - at that time, much!}? Polyhistory isknowing 714
a lot historically^]' knowing a lot rationallywould be called polymathy {this
includes philosophy and mathematics}[;] and <both taken together>[,]
knowing a lot about everything (if that can be thought)[,] would be called
pansophy.
The polyhistor must be (i.) a humanist,i.e., he must be well-acquainted
with the ancients and the fine arts (poetic and rhetorical art).
{The humaniora are advantageousfor cognition1 of taste and for participation in the sensations of others. This latter, namely, the faculty to
communicate one's sensations <cognitions' f and feelings> to others,
constitutes exactly what is characteristic of the humanist. - The humanist
is such through the fact that his cognition is science, learnedness. -}
What corresponds to the humanist is the belletrist. He is not concerned,
like the former, with the independently beautiful, but only with what is
alterable in accordance with the variety of taste that follows fashion.
{The belletrist is only one who apes the humanist - a mere dilettante.
We have to decide for one or the other. In order not to become a pedant,
the belletrist pursues merely gallantry." The gallant manner is nothing
other than tasteful popularity. Scholastic perfection (congruence1 with
rules <with the object>[)] always remains the first requisite for cognition, just as in the case of language grammatical correctness is required
first -
then elegance. Popularity <congruence°' with the subject> must be the
descent* of a cognition, insofar as it already has scholastic perfection. He
who holds (scholastic perfectionl <in social intercourse> to be the only
perfection is called apedant; he can never communicate except with someone who has also been schooled in the same way/ Gallantry is just as
much a mistake.}
The polyhistor must be
2. a linguist, one well-acquainted with ancient languages, because here
it is a matter of independent, lasting models.
3. The literator is someone well-acquaintedwith books (Magliabecchi,10
a famous book-collector2 in Florence, had a terrific memory). Philology is
the complex of all instruments of learnedness. The philologist is the
"historische Vielwisserei."
"Kenntnis."
"Kenntnisse."
"galante Studia."
"Angemessenheit."
"Angemessenheit."
"Herablassung."
"der die Schule mitgemacht."
"Buchfuhrer."
451
connoisseur of the tools of learnedness," the humanist is the connoisseur
of the cultivation of taste. Humanity is always at the same time popular.
Only dead languages can become models of taste, not living ones, for the
latter simply change too often, and words whose meaning was noble have
715 a lower meaning. To have lasting taste, one must study the ancients. If the
ancients were to be lost, one has to fear the spread of barbarism. In
Hindustan there is a language that was once in use there but is now dead
{its origin unknown} (Sanskrit), which is quite perfect, but is only spoken
by a few Brahmins. The belletrist is called a dilettante[;] he finds pleasure
and taste in the fine arts.
We can divide the talent of man inasmuch as it is inclined:
1. toward science or
2. toward art {all culture rests on these two things}.
The latter I art I can now be divided into:
a) liberal arts, artes liberales or ingenuae {a liberal art is skill that pleases
immediately},
b) into wage-earning arts/ artes mercenales[,] serviles, which can please only as a
means to some self-serving end {wage-earning arts always please only mediately, for other purposes, and just so all the sciences, too. They almost always
please only on account of their usefulness!,] etc. Mathematics pleases immediately, to be sure, but to this extent one could also reckon it among the free
arts. Wage-earning art can be made to order - not liberal art - I we Icannot
make its products according to rules like the former.}
This division of talent must be handled carefully. The beautiful is that
which pleases through itself. With this one simply does not ask about use.
If, with an art, one asks about the use, then it is an art for earning one's
bread/
As for what concerns the sciences, these may be divided into
1. historical sciences and
2. sciences of reason.
The complex of historical sciences is learnedness. The complex of
sciences of reason has no particular name, for its parts[,] philosophy and
mathematics[,] are simply too very different. The complex of all sciences
is called polyhistory, of which we spoke above.
The author speaks now of the pedant. He is (i.) scholastic pedant, (2.)
* Ak, "Gelehrsamkeit, der Humanist"; Ko and MS, "Gelehrsamkeit. Der Philolog ist der
Kenner der Werkzeuge der Gelehrsamkeit, der Humanist."
' liberal arts [or] ones worthy ofa free man.
' "Lohnkünste."
4
arts that are hired, servile.
' "Brotkunst."
452D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
pedant in matters of politeness/E.g., someone speaks like a book, always
under the compulsion of rules. {One finds such people at courts, e.g.,
chamberlains.}
Of pedantry 716
{p. 24, § 65.}"
By a pedant we do not understand one who is ignorant (thus the
author's explanation is incorrect). But he is laughed at. How does that
happen? The word pedant comes from Italian and means actually magister
pedarius.g Now this latter was merely a schoolman, not for the world at all,
because he did not come to the master's table but was for the most part
with the servants.
{Pedantry is fussiness in form. No nation is so inclined to this as the
German nation is. Pedantry exists in all fields, above all in the military and
among jurists. - A charlatan [is] one who ostentatiously displays a meager
cognition.}
Pedantry is useless exactitude <fussiness> in formalities. Purposive
exactitude <meticulousness> in formalities is thoroughness. The two
have a certain similarity, then. In many cases there is much that is arbitrary in formalities. For scholastic purposes they are useful, but not for
popular ones, i.e., in social intercourse. Fussiness and meticulousness are
thus to be distinguished.
It is very true that the transition from meticulousness to fussiness is
quite easy. One cannot possibly learn everything according to formalities,
e.g., to write a letter. Thus one sees the great difference between the
pupil's wooden letter and his sister's flowing one {although the latter one
may not be at all orthographic}. The Muses do need the society of the
Graces, then, and these latter consist in the fact that the dust of the
school, the scholastic, is wiped away from the cognition and it becomes
popular, universally comprehensible. {Therefore the ground of the cognition must be scholastically correct, however.}
Pedantry is not unique to the scholarly estate but peculiar to all
classes. A dummy11 is one who cannot create anything from himself but
can merely imitate, and when he wants to produce something from his
cognitions cannot depart at all from the scholastic formulas. {D.; umbraticus12 - the sign of a pedant. - Gallantry means a beautifying of that
which is not in itself a beautiful object.} Charlatanism is boasting and
ostentation. Belletrism belongs to the fashionable Studium, which alters
r "Höflichkeitspedant."
* a teacher of inferior rank, who must travel on foot (reading "pedarius" for "pedanius").
"Pinsel."
453
so often. The more a science is extended <not> as to content but
rather as to space the shallower it becomes.
717 Ofthe quantity of learned cognition
Extensiveness consists in extensive quantity in the manifold {to know
about many things}. Intensive quantity is concerned with degree {to know
much about one thing. Non multa, sed multum. The quantity of the extension weakens the degree - produces shallowness. There is more valueon
the whole when some fewhave deep cognition in the science - which they
treat with thoroughness - than when it is' distributed universally.}
Mathematics, e.g., is extensive quantity. One must restrict the manyness of cognitions in order to produce a unity.
The author always speaks of learned cognition. But this expression is
improper. Cognition can be called scientific* if it is scientific' and systematic. Now this involves a main principle, just as in history one accepts the
civil constitution"1 as a main principle. History can also be regarded as a
science, then, if it is brought into a system, which one derives from a main
principle.
The whole doctrine of elements is nothing more than common cognition, and the whole of logic should be treated thus, so that the common
man can understand it without other cognitions. In regard to objects, a
cognition can be extensively great, in regard to objects - their manyness
and manifold application, as in mathematics. Even popularity deals not
with how much" <quantum> but rather with how many things" <quot>
we know. This contributes to using it in society. In one age enlightenment
can be extensively great, namely, when it reaches all, but intensively small,
namely, because no one has very much of it, but all simply know some
little[;] they are so-called bureaux d'esprit? e.g., like Madame Geoffrin,^
who was famous on this account. Just as when one beats gold* very flat it
then takes up a great space, but on the other hand it is thin and can easily
be damaged. The extensive quantity of enlightenment can also be called
subjective, since it stretches to all subjects, but the intensive can be called
objective, which deals with degree.
Reading "ist" for "sind."
"restringiren."
"scientifisch."
"wissenschaftlich."
"bürgerliche Verfassung."
"wieviel."
"wie vielerlei."
French: obsolete expression for societies, or clubs, of intellectuals.
Reading "Gold" for "Geld."
454
The author speaks further now:
Of the fruitfulness and importance of a cognition
Fecunditas et dignitas." Both have to do with the intensively great. Former
rests on the multitude <of the consequences>, latter on the {importance
of the consequences}. But we also have5 cognitions that are at the same 718
time fruitful and important. {Everything that cultivates the understanding
is logically important. Hence mathematics is so to an exceptional degree,
on account of its clarity, distinctness, certainty. - Distinctness: where the
concept's marks are clear. When the marks of the marks are so, Wolff
called this completeness - however, the partial concepts can always have
still others in' themselves, and here there is Ino I limit, then, until the
simple representations.}
Now we come to a material that does belong to logic proper, namely,
Of the truth of learned cognition
Logic begins with clear concepts but gives no rules for how they are made
clear. For logic presupposes consciousness of representations. Thus logic
properly teaches only of the distinctness of concepts.
Now we have spoken of the quantity and quality of cognition and we
come now to
III. the relation of representations in our cognition. The agreement of
representations with their object is called truth. - Nowin this chapter we
wish to have a criterion of truth that holds without distinction in all
cognitions. {The skeptics said all judgments were made haphazardly —
oiaX,X,rjXT|," always the grounded on the ground and this again on the
grounded, hence in a circle.}
{There is a universal formal criterion of truth, however, agreement of
[cognition] with itself- a material criterion, agreement with the object[,]
cannot be possible universally - for (ifit were universal) it would also have
to occur when I abstract from all matter, - and the agreement of my
cognition of the object with my cognition of the object would be <a>
tautological criterion. Hence the skeptics overturned the latter[;] the
former they were not able to attack.}
The universal criterion of truth will really always be only formal, will
abstract from all content and difference of cognition. It will never say to
me, then, whether my cognition agrees with the object, but whether my
Fruitfulness and worth.
Ak, "Wir haben auch"; MS and Ko, "Wir haben aber auch."
Reading "in" for "unter."
diallelon.
455
cognition agrees with me myself. The universal criterion of truth will not
719 be an organon but only the conditio sine qua non, the unavoidable condition of truth. This is that we are in agreement with ourselves in thought.
How could a cognition that <is not at one with itself agree with the
object>? The criterion must consist in the rule with which alone the
understanding agrees with itself in thought. It is not sufficient materially,
but it is still unavoidably necessary. A material criterion of truth cannot
possibly be universal and hold for all objects. One can of course have
material criteria of truth, but they cannot be universal t- They would be
those that we have from the character of the object in respect of the
senses.
{HOUR}
Through intuition the object is given and through concepts it is thought.
The universal criterion of truth is merely negative. The skeptics can be
divided into Pyrrhonists and Academics, the latter of whom pursued it
furthest. The principle of contradiction is the first formal criterion of
truth. For truth it is not enough that a judgment be possible - truth could
be called logical aduality. If one says posito1' a triangle has 6 sides, then this
is a problematic judgment[;] if one says a hexagon has 6 sides, then it's a
proposition.
The first criterion of truth (after the principle of contradiction) is the principle
of the problematic judgment - possibility. The 2nd is the principle of assertoric judgments, in which logical actuality {- truth}. The 2nd principle is the
principle of sufficient reason. {Cause is that which lies at the ground of all
appearances.}
3. Every cognition has some consequence or other, and if only one
consequence is false, then the cognition is false too. If all the consequences are true, then the cognition is true - but who can know all the
consequences? That involves omniscience. One can infer from the consequences to the grounds, then. From the falsehood of the consequences
one can infer only to the falsehood of the ground, but from this to the
truth of the opposite. {- 106}
{ad § 109.} A false judgment is always an error. In this case one must
720 prove, however, that it conflicts with the criterion of truth. Error requires
that we hold a false judgment to be true. Unfortunately we are filled with
errors, but to take precautions against them we must first know whence
they have sprung.
I posit [that].
456D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
{Truth and error cannot possibly be contained in intuitions - but rather
in judgments. Hence [there are] more errors in an academy of sciences
than in a village full of farmers, because more judging occurs there - he
who never judges will never err either.}
Neither truth nor error rests on the concepts of our understanding, but
rather only on its <judgments>. Judgment is an action of the understanding. Truth, however, according to its formal criterion, is the agreement of a
judgment with the laws of the understanding. But error is a deviation of
judgment from the laws ofthe understanding. - {If I isolatethe understanding, then, so that I take away sensibility, then it could not err (for no power
can produce an effect except according to certain laws) - only when I hold
an influence of sensibility to be an actus of the understandingis it error. All
our errors are turnings of judgments to the diagonal - crosswise"" (the
[German] word [for this] comes perhaps from the English [word]
square') -}.
How is it possible for a power to depart from its own laws? - The
restrictions on the human understanding are not the ground of errors.
They are grounds of a great lack in our cognition < - of ignorance (which
we cognize only after [acquiring] much science of reason)>, but not of
contradiction. Now since it is nothing negative, and the understanding
alone by itself cannot err, it must be something positive - sensibility. The
oppositum of the understanding does not judge at all, however. Now we
have no other source. We see, then, that it occurs through die combination of the understanding and sensibility{thus we call the subjectivein our
representations}. Insofar as this ground lies in sensibility, we call it illusion. This is usually explained as the subjective that is falsely held to be
something objective. {The ground of all error [is] a subjective ground of
our judgment that we regard as an objective one. A man readily believes
what he wishes. Wish is a subjective Iground, I but for belief one must
have an objective one.}
Sensibility also has its own laws. Combined in a judgment, they can of
course agree with one another. Solely in the combination of two heteroge- 721
neous grounds of determination. The matter of errors is thus neither true
nor false.
{Porismata:3 We are responsible for all errors - for all judgments are
arbitrary and only through judgments are errors possible.
No error is a wholly false judgment. The judgment can be correct in
form.}
"in die Quere."
"aus dem englischen square —Quadrat."
Corollaries.
457
{HOUR, FRI., THE l8TH OF MAYJ
Every error must be explained. We have internal marks of truth, which are
grounded in our understanding, and 2ndly external marks. The former
include the principle of contradiction <the logical criterion of possibility
(problemat.)> and the 2nd principle, that the judgment as proposition
must always be grounded <the logical criterion of actuality (of assertoric
judgments), the principle of sufficient reason>. The 3rd <the logical
criterion of truth <necessity», that if one cannot cognize the truth of a
proposition from its grounds, then one can from its consequences. {One
cannot judge here through a sense of truth2 - as little as one can judge
duty through moral feeling. One can never judge through the senses but
only through the understanding. -}
The external criteria (marks) of truth consist in the agreement of the
judgments of others with our own. This is actually not a logical, but rather
a psychological criterion. Merely by comparing one's judgment with that
of another, one cognizes whether the ground of determination of our
judgment is subjective or objective[;] the latter is universallyvalid, Ithe I
former not. {(Many exceptions to a rule indicate its defectiveness.)}
In logic sensibility is called the subjective in our t cognition.
{Principium rationati: nihil sine ratione," everything must have its ground.
This is the criterion from consequences. It is negative and sure. If the
consequences are false, then certainly the ground is so too.One cannot
infer conversely. If the consequences are true, etc. For there can be
several grounds. Principium rationis:b every proposition is itself a ground,
has its consequences.}
{There is a natural drive, a vocation, to communicate one's cognitions
to others - hence freedom of communication is a human right (only if it
could be wholly contrary to the interest of the state might there be a
prohibition by the authorities.)
722 Possession of the power of judgment is the greatest gift of nature.
There can be a lack of it even in an understandingthat is otherwise good.}
In a certain way one can say of all cognitions that one only understands
them rightly when one can make them himself, i.e., not merely copy them
but derive them from himself/
No judgment could be found that would be wholly false. This cannot
occur as long as our judgments are derived from the understanding.
One cannot really convince anyone of the opposite of his opinion unless
one says to him how he came to it from his own particular viewpoint, that
"durch Wahrheitssinn."
Principle of the grounded: nothingwithout a ground.
Principle of the ground.
"aus sich ableiten."
458
his judgment is not objective, then, but merely subjective. According to
our subjective judgment, then, our final end would be happiness[;] that
suits us, we want that. But if we concern ourselves with what we ought [to
do], with the objective, then morality, duty, must occupy this place.
Through the method just set forth one gains in critical faculty of understanding. Thus it is said that in a great book there are great errors, and
this is quite natural.
Now there follows a distinction between
1. partial truth (true tolerabiliter, e.g., in measurements) {since the acceptance of
the partially true as totally true does not contradict the end - although this
involves a certain incorrectness. - } and
2. total truth.
Someone can speak the truth but not the whole truth. But one must see
that it does not run counter to the ends of cognition.
Now the author speaks of
exact and crude cognition. The latter does not indicate that it contains
something false, but only that it is not wholly true. Every cognition is
either cognitio vaga or cognitio determinata. Thus, e.g., medium tenuere beati,d
what is good and what is too much or too little, such men do not know
this. This is a regula vaga,' which is not at all determinate, merely tautological wisdom. Be wise, make yourself perfect. Now in what does this consist? One takes it in one way, another in another. Even determinate rules
can be regulae late or striae determinatae/Many definitions are of the first
kind. A cognition is called exact when no free play for error is contained in
it. A cognition that requires much attention is called exact in regard to the
object, is called subtle in regard to the subject. He who inappropriately 723
employs his cognition on the small is called a micrologist. If something is
practical, one cannot find fault with subtlety.
{HOUR, THE 2IST OF MAY}
Casuistry consists in a multitude of useless subtleties, where one has
thought out cases that simply do not occur in common life. There have
been ages in which subtleties and micrology held sway to an astonishing
extent.
There is a certain smallness of mindf that is not always noticed. The
people who possess it can never apply a part of cognition to the whole
system of it. This is a great touchstone, from which one can infer immedito hold to the golden mean.
vague rule.
rules that are determined broadly [or] strictly.
"Kleingeisterei."
459
ately to a man's mind. There are differences between mind* and spirit.'
Mind, the faculty of the understanding, but spirit, the faculty of principles.
{That which agrees with universal illusion is aesthetically true, e.g., the
rising and setting of the sun - thus it is quite distinct from logical truth.
One does not go directly from error to truth, but rather only by way of the
consciousness of ignorance.}
A cognition that is exact (exacta) in regard to the object is opposed to a
rough one (rudi). Cognitio vaga[:] do not addj too much to anything, nor
too little[;] here almost nothing at all is said. Those who believe mat the
legislator commands too strictly, that there is still free play between his
laws and their transgression, are called latitudinarians. Here of course
there is nothing fixed, and we must always make an effort to have our
cognition be strictly, exactly determined. This is geometry's merit.
Then there is also a cognitio crassak - rough and ready,' an estimate of the
whole, without passing particular judgment on the individual. {Coarsegrained cognition not only has no exaäitudo, it also spoils men by giving
occasion for errors.}
Truth can be used substantive^ and adjektiveL, e.g., when we think of
truth in general or the truth of a proposition. A cognition that is determinate in regard to the object is called truth. This rational cognition is
724 always apodeictic, because we are conscious not only of its truth but also of
its necessity. An apodeictic cognition is either through concepts or
through construction of concepts. In the former case it is dogmatic, in the
latter mathematical. A cognition that is apodeictically certain from concepts is called a dogmaL, a cognition that is apodeictically certain from the
construction of concepts is called a mathema. —
{An apodeictic proposition: Everything is contingent - (has a cause) -
2 - 2 = 4.'" The latter is intuition, in the other case only a concept. Both
are equally certain objectively, but subjectively there is a great difference.
The mathematician can rest in his work, he still has intuition - this is not
the case for the philosopher, hence his work is far more tiring.}
The propositions of morals and metaphysics are all dogmata^.
Because physics is only an application of the latter cognitions, it has an
apodeictic certainty. A system is a whole <of dogmatic truths> from
principles. {A system is distinct from an aggregate, in that the latter is the
whole which is preceded by the parts.}
The principle of history is time - chronology.
"Kopf."
"Geist."
Ak, "tun zu"; MS and Ko, "zu tun."
coarse-grained cognition.
"über Pausch und Bogen."
Ak, "2 • 4 = 4"; MS and Ko, "2 • 2 = 4."
460D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
{HOUR, THE 22ND OF MAY}
One cannot say of any error that it is unavoidable in itself, but this may
well be said of ignorance. For we have no need to judge about everything,
and if we do so, it still need be only problematically. {There is no error
invincibilis - but [there are] errors that are hard to avoid practically -
Mark: incompatibility with the judgment of others.} An unavoidable error
always presupposes the necessity of judgment. {If the judgment were not
necessary, that is, then one could easily avoid the error by not judging at
all. - }
He who accepts an obviously absurd judgment acts stupidly. {What the
sensus communis recognizes as such - what does not even have illusion on
its behalf. - (Considered logically, noerror is dangerous - here wedo not
look to the matter) - if one ever declares someone's judgment Ito be I
stupid, thus denying he has understanding, then no discours will help to
bring him away from it. He who engages in this, then, acts stupidly
himself.}
Error is not possible in regard to the obviously false, only in judgments
where falsehood lies hidden. Mathematics has the peculiarity that one 725
instantly perceives the falsehood of a proposition there. To remove the
hidden ground of an error is called clearing up the illusion." If someone
maintains something, the falsehood of which he well sees yet without
abandoning it, then the fault lies more with his will than with his understanding. A crude error is one, avoidance of which is easy - it is not the
same thing as a stupid one. A dangerous error, when we are not merely
concerned to extend our cognition but rather, e.g., we always ask first
about the use {into which we perhaps cannot have insight then. The
shallowest minds usually do this.} He who shows the disadvantage of a
cognition when he is supposed to point out its falsehood is called a
consequentarius, because he always infers from the consequences to the
ground {- he starts with thepractical}. -
The author now speaks in the $th section
Of the clarity of cognition
Clarity is consciousness <not> only of representations in the whole but
also of their partial representations. A mark is a partial representation
insofar as it is a ground of cognition of the whole representation. A
ground of cognition is of two sorts:
i • a ground for cognizing a thing in itself[,] or the internal ground of cognition;
2. a ground for cognizing a thing based on other coordinate things[,] or the
external [ground of cognition]. -
"den Schein entwickeln."
461
In the comparison with others we cognize either
1. through the nota {nota, a partial representation which lies at the basis of the
concept as mark} identitatis {mark, characteristic} and
2. through the nota diversitatis {sign of differentiation, e.g., between man and
animal}.
Partial representations as grounds of cognition can be partial concepts
and partial intuitions. The latter do not occur in logic.
A concept is the representation ofthat which comprises many representations.
The author makes a distinction between mediate and immediate representations. All combinations are either combinations of coordination or of
726 subordination. The former produce a whole that is called an aggregate.
They arise through connection of the manifold. Insofar as it involves
subordination of one thing to another," it is called a series. Now there is a
terminus a priori and one a posteriori^ in logic, [there is] only the one a
parte ante1 not the latter a pane post/ {A mediate mark is a nota notae, a
mark of a mark. When in the series of representations subordinated to one
another one finally comes to an indivisible one, this is called the terminus a
pane ante. This latter can be divided[;] e.g., quidquam.1^ One cannot prove
a pane post, only illustrate.}
Marks can here be divided into
1. affirmative and
2. negative. But this pertains really more to judgment than to marks.
{Negative marks, whereby I signify something as an error into which no
one would fall anyway, are superfluous- just as affirmative ones that say
nothing newor unfamiliar - tautologous.} The expression negative marks
implies the matter, and this does not pertain to logic. All negations presuppose affirmations. Thus among savages there isn't any poverty, since this
would occur only in comparison with the wealthy. Since they are not
acquainted with the positive, they do not form any representation of the
negative. Thus, too, no person <born> blind can form a representation
of darkness, because he is not acquainted with light.
A mark is important when it is a ground of cognition of great consequences. {Marks in comparison with others (as to diversity or identity) are
not as important as those through derivation, internal marks. Importance
is: (i.) logical, e.g., 3 terminiin a syllogism; (2.) practical. - Thus logical,
grammatical incorrectness can be practically unimportant (in a certain
respect).}
If it serves for differentiation of a ground of cognition that itself is great
as to degree, then (where the mark is determined as to degree) this is
' "Sofern eseinander subordiniert ist."
p
a terminus on the preceding side [and one] on the posterior side.
' on the prior side.
' ontheposterior side.
462
called intensive,[but] when a mark has reference to multitude, manifoldness {in general, to extension} - extensive. A mark is sufficient when it
contains {suffices for derivation [of]} the ground of all differentiating
marks, insufficient when it only contains the ground of a few signs of
differentiation. But an insufficient ground is not to be rejected. For it 727
always contains a part of the ground - as guesses {without these latter we
never arrive at certainty}.
Marks are divided further into:
1. absolutely necessary, unchangeableones and
2. contingent ones.
Those without which the thing absolutely cannot be thought are necessary. One attains them through the mere analysis of the concept. {Essence
[is] the complex of the highest marks of a thing, complexus notarum conceptum aliquem primitive constituentium.* First, completudo is required; (2.)
that the marks are not derived from others but rather are primitive - and
inseparable - the logical essence the inner possibility.}
In logic the talk is never of the marks of things. In that case logic
would occupy itself with matter. But it deals only with the marks of the
concept. What is physically necessary can be logically only contingent.
E.g., it is physically necessary that all bodies fall, but this lies only in the
thing and logically is only contingent. The notae logicae necessariae' belong
to the esse of the concept. These are ad esse conceptus necessariae,pertinent
ad essentiam." {Man is mortal, can err - extraessentiale —what does not
belong essentially to it.} One cannot remove these marks without removing
the thing itself. —Melius esse logicum (like beatitudo juridica, when it is a
matter of beatipossidentes).1*
The necessary marks of things belong to the thing itself {or ad t esse}:
1. either as constitutiva, as constituents <essentialia>{essential parts}
— originarie1' I belonging to the concept I {originarie: extension}'6
2. or as rationata, as consequences <attributa> which belong to the
concept derivative^, e.g., the concept triangle - the consequences are
whether the angles [are] right t or etc.
With corporeal things, divisibilityis a mark, quodpertinet ad essentiam,"
not as constitutivum," however, but rather as rationatum.y {From the mark
that the creature is corporeal, divisibility can be derived.}
the complex of marks that constitute a conceptprimitively.
logically necessary marks.
necessary to the being of the concept, they pertain to the essence.
original [marks].
which pertains to the essence.
something constitutive.
something grounded.
463
The former are also called essentialia, essential parts2 {the complex of all
essentials is called the essence}, the latter attributiva (properties) {these
are (i.) communia;" (2.) propria}.b
728 Contingent marks are either:
1. notae internal contingentes' - modi, e.g., learnedness Ior I
2. notae externae contingentes —sive relationes.d
The tabular division of marks <predicates> would thus be
1. ad essentiam pertinentia,1 without which the thing cannot be thought.
a) ut rationata sive attributa-f
b) ut constitutiva sive essentialia.1
{One can often derive one concept from another, they reciprocate.*
That gives the most certain mark.}
2. extraessentialia {without which the concept I can be thought I}, e.g., a triangle -
there the angles are undetermined.
a) externa - relation, the external determination, whether he [is] father or son
{the external determinations of marks are always contingent};
b) intema, the internal determinations of a thing, insofar as they are not
necessary, are called modi, e.g., learned or not learned.
When we speak of the essence of things, then we do so of the logical
essence (that consists in the concept), not of the real essence (nature),
which is treated in metaphysics. {[The] complex of all those internal
determinations that contain the first ground of the existence of a thing is
called the natural essence. - Into this it is very hard to have insight, [but]
into the logical essence it is easy, it lies merely in the concept. -}
Essentia est complexus notarum conceptum aliquem primitive' constituentiumJ
The logical essence is the complex of those marks that are sufficient to
derive what belongs to the essence. The logical essence is easy to cognize.
For with this one has nothing to do but analyze concepts. We can never
have complete insight into the real essence, e.g., we can never experience
all the marks of water no matter how far physics advances. All the same,
some logical concepts are hard to define, e.g., the concept of virtue. There
we are far short of having found all the marks. We name the following: a
2 "wesentliche Stücke."
" common.
* proper, peculiar.
' contingent internal marks.
d contingent external marks - or relations.
' things pertaining totheessence.
^ as things grounded, or attributes.
1
as things constitutive, or essential things.
* "reciprocieren."
1 Ak, "primitive"; MS and Ko, "primitivum."
; The essence isthecomplex ofmarks that constitute a certain conceptprimitively.
464D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
readiness* in lawful actions that are done freely[;] but this is still not
enough {it is moral strength in pursuit of these, with struggle against
obstacles}. Body can be defined perfectly - afillingof space indicates only
matter, but the description of its figure in accordance with the three
dimensions indicates bodies.
Now the author speaks
Of obscure representations 729
Let us suppose the representation is distinct, i.e., its partial representations are clear[;] e.g., justice[;] there is compulsion here[;] fairness is
distinct from this[;] it is very hard to have insight into this. We can make
obscure representations clear through examples, but this clarification is
not logical, only aesthetic.
{Obscurity is subjective if the ground lies in the subject - objective ifin
the object. —An obscure representation - that of which one is not conscious[;] this seems to be a contradiction - one cannot Icomprehend I it
immediately, but one can do so mediately through inference.}
We often call an exposition obscure because it is logically distinct but
does not have enough clarity aesthetically - no suitable examples can be
given {e.g., body, extended impenetrable figure}. Virtue can be distinguished from holiness; for with the latter no temptations toward evil occur
{e.g., the angels}. This has generally been forgotten. In our distinct cognition we can think another perfection, completudo <exhaustiveness -
exhaustive distinctness> {in a concept, where there are coordinate murks, as
well as depth through subordinate marks - if here I have even just a single
[mark], it can still be a nota superior- [they] may be traced back to simple
concepts.} The greatest distinctness through subordinate marks is called
depth of cognition. Both together constitute thoroughness.
{NTH HOUR}
Deep distinctness is always harder to understand, because it is more
abstract. To attain full distinctness one must seek out marks of marks,
until at last one attains the highest marks, the simple concepts. We can
compare this with lively cognition or rather with the lively mode of representation <consciousness is in this case lively>. {The more this representation produces alterations in the subject, the livelier is this science f
through examples.} We can call this aesthetically greater clarity liveliness.
Logically greater clarity is distinctness.
{Comprehensibility and clarity are to be distinguished. Through the
resolution of marks a concept becomes harder to comprehend —on ack "Fertigkeit."
465
730 count of subtlety. All making distinct' rests on the development of partial
representations (insofar as these are not of themselves clear).}
All our representations can have two relations, first to the subject, then
they arecalled sensations, second totheobject, - - - cognition.
Cognitions can become lively:
1. if they are related to the material, sensibility <sensation> (subj.);
2. if they are related to the formal, intuition (objective).
{A representation that enlivens must exhibit the object as present.
It is different i. to make a cognition distinct (here nothing is added, only
raised to distinctness, this [is] I analyticI,
2. to make a distinct cognition —where previously there was none, this
[is] I synthetic I.}
With logical distinctness it is not at all a matter of the multitude of the
marks <See p. 42 ... t>»17 but with aesthetic distinctness it is precisely a
matter of their manifoldness"1 (e.g., description of spring). The origin of
distinctness is of two kinds, analyticand synthetic. The mathematician has
this last manner.
Now the author speaks
Of the comprehensible and the incomprehensible
Feelings can never produce a cognition. {The word representation may
not be explained at all. For one would thereby have to presuppose the
concept of it.}
We begin (i.) with representing. The 2nd is then toperceive somethingperdpere - to represent something with consciousness[;] the third - to be
acquainted with something <noscere>, i.e., so to cognize that one is acquainted with it in comparison with others as to their identity and diversity.
To understand something <intelligere>: to represent something through the
understanding, through concepts {so that one can explain oneself concerning it, state its marks}. To cognize the thingfrom reason {i.e., apriori through
the understanding, even if it were not given}, from universal principles
according to its grounds, is called havinginsight {perspicere}." Hence ... to
have insight apriori is to cognize not only that it is so <as, e.g., dissolution of
731 salt by water> but that it must be so <e.g., a solar eclipse (mathematically)
{even if we had not seen it}>. The last step is to comprehend, to have insight
into something sufficiently <for a certain purpose>. To comprehend absolutely <in every respect>, comprehendere, <is for us impossible> {not moral
rules}. One can comprehend perfectly various hydraulic phenomena of
water, e.g., and have insight into this apriori{as soon as we accept fluidity as
' "Alle Deutlichmachung."
* "Vielfältigkeit."
" "einsehen {einsehen perspicere}."
466
a hypothesis - tohave insight requires consciousness oftruth throughout}.
But one can <not> have insight a priori into that which is fluid.
Examples contribute to understanding only aesthetically.'8 Often we
believe that we have insight into something that fundamentally we can
only explain - understand according to itspossibility.
We always understand best that which we can make ourselves.
A distinct concept becomes complete when all marks are contained
therein {exhaustively distinct, insofar as it contains all coordinate marks.}
{Totality in regard to subordinate marks is called by the author completeness.} One must not make his concept excessively full," for one
makes it hard for oneself if one takes up superfluous Imarks I. A concept where all dispensable marks are left out is called precise/ A concept that contains not too much, not too little, is called adequate {since
we cognize not only the marks themselves but also the marks of the
marks, but the concept adequate does not fit until the series is wholly
brought to an end.}
The first grade of subordination is a mark of a mark. An adequate
concept rests on coordination.
{When the sum of the marks does not contain too much —precise -
when it does not contain too little - adequate. Distinctness of the understanding is that through concepts. Distinctness of the power of judgment
[is] that with examples through intuition. Distinctness of reason [is] that
through mediate marks (as distinctness of understanding [is that] through
immediate ones). All concepts that are not precise [are] indeterminate,
vague.*}
A lucid mind [is one] that always knows what it wants.
SIXTH DIVISION
Of the certainty of cognition
Here the talk is not of truth but of holding-to-be-true. {Objectively, all
propositions are certainly true or certainly false.} This is judgment in 732
relation' to the subject. We want in this case to know not the grounds of the
truth but those of the holding-to-be-true. The degrees are: (i.) opining,
(2.) believing, (3.) knowing. We can call these three concepts the modalities of the sensus veri etfalsi.1
Opining is a holding-to-be-true that is, with consciousness, both subjectively and objectively insufficient. An insufficient holding-to-be-true is
" "Superabundant."
f "präzis."
* "vag."
' "imVerhältnis und der Beziehung auf."
' sense ofthe true and the false.
467
what does not suffice to exclude the opposite. He who only opines is still
open to opposing grounds.
If <one> believes, however, then this is no longer so. {It is an assertoric holding-to-be-true, which we nevertheless still do not cognize with
the consciousness of necessity (hence we have to admit that modifications
are possible).} Belief is a holding-to-be-true that is subjectively <sufficient> but objectively insufficient, with consciousness. Believing is distinct from knowing, then, in that it is incapable of proof. Believing is a
private holding-to-be-true, sufficiently certain only for me. Hence I cannot yet say that I know it.
Knowing is a holding-to-be-true that is sufficient both subjectively and
objectively. {I hold the opposite to be impossible. Opining is a holding-tobe-true that is both objectively and subjectively insufficient, with consciousness. The concept of belief is best grasped in a practical respect
(although this influence on the will does not pertain to logic).} It can be
empirical through experience or apodeictic a priori. The holding-to-betrue of an apodeictic proposition can be apodeictically certain.
What I opine, this judgment I pronounce only problematically^] hence
the holding-to-be-true is (i.) problematic, namely, when it is accepted in
such a way that it is still to be proved f. It is called problematic because it
only serves for finding, among various grounds, the sufficient one.
Now in belief the holding-to-be-true is (2.) assertoric. For I say that it is
sufficient for me <subjectively>, but I do not settle whether it is objectively sufficient. Many representations of a future state are mere products
of imagination[;] some ideas that please us greatly (e.g., of male and
female light'«) [are] only ideas in the subject.
In knowledge the holding-to-be-true is (3.) apodeictic. {Intuitio in mathematics. Conviction. Persuasion is the illusion of conviction, uncertain
whether subjective or objective.}
733 The propositions held to be true' can be empirical and the holding-tobe-true be apodeictic. The holding-to-be-true is combined either with
the consciousness of subjective necessity or with that of the contingent. In
the latter case, when it is subjectively and objectively insufficient, [it is]
opining, but when it is subjectively sufficient and objectively insufficient -
believing. Hypotheses are opinions. In mathematics there is neither opining nor believing but only knowing - or nothing - andin merely speculative metaphysics it is the same.
{Something is a matter of opinion if it simplycannot become an object of
knowledge, neither objectively nor subjectively (e.g., whether there are
inhabitants of the moon). - Concerning the possibility of animals' reproduction oftheir ownkind wewill never havemore than opinions. - Matters
of belief, where there is for us t only a subjectively sufficient ground for
' "Die Sätze des Fürwahrhaltens."
468D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
holding-to-be-true. - Everything that we accept based on ends is for us
only subjectively sufficient - (i.e., I must accept that this is so, or else I
make no progress with my reason here - this I cannot accept as holding
objectively, of course, but it is sufficient for me.)
Where t knowledge is possible, this is already a matter of knowledge,
e.g., geography. - Only objects of rational belieP can be called matters of
belief.}
What are objects of opinion, belief, and knowledge? Are objectively
historical propositions objects of opinion, of belief, or even of knowledge?
They are objects of knowledge. For there are cases where we can use the
experience of others as our own. Are mathematical propositions objects of
opinion, etc.[?] Because they are apriori, they are all objects of knowledge.
(Concepts are called transcendental when we have them a priori.) Can't
one also accept propositions a priori on belief? Yes. Mathematics is also of
this kind. {One believes mathematicians because it is not possible that
they can err, since they would hit upon false consequences at once. In
philosophy, however, there is no belief.
He who is capable of rational belief [is] a believer." The morally practical rests merely on reason. What is either itself a duty, then, or stands in
close connection"" with it - this [is] the object of belief (of practical
holding-to-be-true) - he who does not, etc., [is] an unbeliever[;]* hewho
believes everything else [is] credulous/}
That for whose opposite one has no grounds is a matter of opinion.
There are objects of opinion that can become objects of belief and of 734
knowledge, e.g., in physics, what Newton opines about the origin of the
planets, etc. There is a belief that is valued the same as knowledge in a
practical (not in a speculative) regard, e.g., some of the propositions of the
ancient philosophers - probabilism. The certainty that <pertains> to cognition* of the commandment to perform or not to perform" an action is
moral. That which is certain according to rules of prudence can be
<called> not morally, but rather pragmatically certain. The concept of
moral certainty is misused when one often has nothing more than a
practically sufficient ground of truth {e.g., in the case of bets}[;] it need
not be theoretically certain. {Logical certainty (apodeictic) is (i.) philosophical, (2.) mathematical.}Moral certainty relates to conscience. E.g., in
the case of dogmas of Catholicism, which some accept without consulting
conscience. When one does something at the risk of erring, then one is
"Gegenstände des Vernunftglaubens."
"Gläubig."
"in connater Verbindung."
"ungläubig."
y "leichtgläubig."
"Kenntnis."
" "des Gebots oder Verbots."
469
never morally certain. In the word belief one always thinks of voluntary*
approval, in the word opinion of approval that is decided/ A matter of
belief is that which ought to be held true, and of which there is no
knowledge. It is regarded as a holding-to-be-true that depends on my
wish/ Rational belief is called simply fides. It is a complicated concept.
{For a believer' we actually have no Latin word -fidelis —faithful - .}
There are certain transcendent judgments/which lie outside the boundaries of our cognition, which one can only believe. He who is not convinced even by moral grounds is an unbeliever. In the theological sense,
an unbeliever is one who does not have insight into the supersensible and
will not accept it, even if morally it is actually necessary, because it cannot
be proved theoretically with reason <it is uncertain>. He who does not
accept even what is historically certain, just because the certainty is not
apodeictic, is called disbelieving/ Certainty is the objective sufficiency of
holding-to-be-true. In the case of belief it is subjective. There I can only
say: / am certain. But in the case of certainty: It is certain, this is universally valid.
A rational cognition* is different from a cognition of reason'!;] the
former must be the property of all cognitions. As for the distinction of
mathematical certainty, it is a matter not of degree but of quantity.
All certainty is either
735 i. empirical, is that which derives from experience, I or I
2. rational, is that whose origin is apriori. It is considered, again, in two respects:
objectively a) logical, in respect of the theoretical faculty of cognition; subjectively b) practical, in respect of moral use.
Rational logical certainty is called generaliter an apodeictic certainty, for
it is cognized from grounds a priori. {We have conviction about a thing
when we cognize it as true with the consciousness that our judgment is
objective.} One cannot say that mathematical certainty is greater than
philosophical certainty. The difference lies only in the fact that it is intuitive, while the philosophical is only discursive. Philosophical certainty can
still attain the same degree, but <never> the property of being intuitive.
In the case of philosophical propositions it is customarily said that they are
as certain as 2 times 2 [=] 4[;] but this is not determinate, for the latter is
mathematical, not philosophical certainty. {The degree of both certainties
is the same, but they are of different kinds.}
* "freiwilligen."
' "einen entschiedenen Beifall."
' "Belieben."
' "Für Gläubig."
f "überschwengliche Urtheile (transcendent)"
* "ungläubisch."
* "Ein vernünftiges Erkenntnis."
' "Vernunfterkenntnis."
470
{HOUR, MONDAY}
Acceptance is a contingent approval that has sufficient ground in regard to a
certain purpose. Settled[:] this presupposes a dispute, since the matter was
uncertain. One cannot say of mathematical propositions that they are
settled; for who can dispute about them?
{Sometimes it is said that something is indisputable. But this means no
more than undisputed - no one has ever been found whohas rejected it.}
No cognition but the mathematical can be presented evidently.' Nothing
else, namely, can bring about an intuitus apriori.
{A cognition is called thorough insofar as it is secured against doubt by
logically sufficient grounds.} A thorough cognition must be derived from
sure principles. Thorough history can only be attained through chronology.
Coherent means the same as consequent, that everything stands in connection.* The coherent is the highest thing in the use of our cognition - to be
consequent. {Consequent means correct in consequences1 when the connection 736
of the consequences with the ground is in accordance with logical laws.
Coherent, this proposition fits together with the previous ones in the series
of a system. - The more consequent a man is with respect to dangerous
maxims, the more harmful he is.-}
When the mathematician demonstrates, he compels everyone who understands him to approve. We really cannot say here, then, that we give
him approval. {The expression, to give approval,"1 seems not to lie in our
will. Can we withhold our approval of a mathematical proof? Holding-tobe-true pertains to the understanding, but investigation to the faculty of
choice.}
In suspensio judicii there lies some freedom. One can also give his
approval and yet, in judging, not make a decision - which still awaits
further grounds - where one accepts the opposite as still possible. I am
free when I accept a proposition in a practical respect for the good that
can follow from it. One can say, then, that there are things in matters of
religion, e.g., our eternal continued existence, which we accept just for
this good, for this life is not at all adequate to the idea of the highest good.
Suspensio judicii consists in this, that when all the grounds on both sides
are equally insufficient, none is predominant. It can be (i.) ob indifferentiam" — (2.) ob aequilibrium." To hold oneself in suspensio judicii by choice
{this is the mean between holding-to-be-true and rejecting - it remains
1 "Augenscheinlich."
"im nexu, im Zusammenhang."
' "folgerecht."
Reading "zugeben" for "zu geben."
" on account of indifference.
" on account of equilibrium.
471
only a problematic judgment} shows a very great mind and is extremely
hard on account of the fact that the inclination toward immediate judgment of the understanding interferes. Ob aequilibrium[,] to be and to
remain inconclusive[,] gives evidence of weak minds.
Argumentum ad crumenamf because he who does not have a full purse
cannot take part in the wager. {Of him who will not take part in a wager it
is assumed that he is uncertain of his matter.}
Argumentum ad verecundiam.q Because a great man has maintained it,
and one can hardly wish to know it better. {A bad argument.}
The best argument is always the ad tutum,r namely, in case one accepts
the most certain. It is cunning, but it does not always lead to the true.
As for what concerns suspensio judidi, it is:
i. critica or indagatoria,1 a postponement of judgment for closer investigation
{until a ground for holding-to-be-true presents itself};
737 2. sceptica, [which] is the renunciation of an assertoric judgment. {A total renunciation of all certainty. The principle, always to postpone one's judgment, is
called eito/fi' - status indifferentiae.}"
We come now to the doctrine
Of prejudices
A provisional judgment {judicium praevium} has in common with prejudice
only the fact that it is likewise made before the investigation of the matter.
[Praejudidum is not distinct from . . . . f the two are the same. The latter
is actually appeal to a judgment, hence <through> experience!;] this
contributes, meanwhile, to culture. Ajudiciumpraevium is a judgment that
precedes investigation1 - there canbe no judgment without reflection, but
there can without investigation[;] what is immediately certain permits
none. - }A.judicium reflertens" is where one sets a judgment as a problem,
in order to investigate its truth. Even for seeking, one must have a particular principle. To seek this out pertains to the faculty of judgment. One
cannot teach this. For if one wanted to give it rules, he would already use
the faculty of judgment in order to subsume under these. A judicium
praevium precedes investigation, then; but it must always occur simultaneously with reflection.
{Provisional judgments arise from grounds that are insufficient, with
p An argument directed to the purse.
* An argument directed to modesty or awe (i.e., an argument from authority).
' [An argument] directed to security.
' critical [or]investigative.
' suspension ofjudgment.
" the condition of indifference.
" Reading "Untersuchung" for "Ueberlegung."
* a judgment to be reflected upon.
472
consciousness. - Skill in provisional judgments is a kind of prudence. This
chapter has until now been neglected in logic. Every inventor must judge
provisionally.}
I reflect on something when I compare it with the laws of the understanding. There are propositions, which arejudicia determinantia (determining judgments) even before any investigation, e.g., between two points
only one straight line is possible. They are also called judicia indemonstrabilia - without proof, immediately certain, unprovable* - wewill speak of
this more in what follows.
{The inclination to judge, to make objectivelyuniversal principles, from
subjectively universal causes, isprejudice. - }
Judicia reflectentiay are those which introduce investigation, which show
(i.) whether a matter needs investigation, (2.) how I ought to investigate a
matter. Prejudice is a maxim of judging objectively from subjective
grounds. A prejudice is never an individual proposition, e.g., the apple
doesn't fall far from the tree. This is not yet a prejudice, but only a 738
consequence from another one. For a prejudice is not a proposition but
only a maximfor drawing propositions from one.A maxim means a subjective
principle.2 An objective one is called a principle." A rule that the subject
makes his principle* is called a maxim. Thus many men make a rule
subjectively their maxim which is objectively false. The maxim is grounded
here on an illusion, which we denned above in such a way. Prejudice is
thus a maxim of holding to be true rules that are grounded on illusion. The
formulas are either (i.) mottoes Ior I (2.) aphorisms - sentences Ior I (3.)
rules' or I (4.) I proverbs/ {A saying is a proposition that is tied to a
customary expression, so that this makes remembering easier. Rules or
canones. Sentences are aesthetic formulas. - Canones are classical ones. -
DictaL are holy formulas.} One will best cognize the national spirit of a
people on the basis of its proverbs. -
The prejudice that we mentioned first, Like father, like son, or something similar, is actually grounded on the fact that one has accepted as
universally valid the maxim that there is much similaritybetween men and
animals. And this prejudice is based on the subjective ground that what
the whole world says is true.
Sentences could be called aesthetic formulas, just as proverbs could be
called formulae vulgäres. Sentences are customarily formulas for wisdom.
Canones are formulas for science. Classical formulas are called, in the
* Reading "unbeweisbare" for "nicht unbeweisbare."
* Judgments to be reflected upon.
' "Grundsatz."
" "Prinzip."
* "Prinzip."
' "Lehrsprüche."
d "Sprichwörter, proverbia."
473
juristic sense, brocardica.' {They have authority and declare all investigation to be superfluous. Proverbs are called loci communes[;Y because everyone speaks thus, it ought to be true - proverbs are the concentrated (common) folk wisdom. Hence those [who] always want to utter proverbs [are]
vulgar.} DictaL are sayings xat' e^oxrjv.*
In the case of all merely subjective grounds we are always passive, e.g.,
with inclination, with custom - the tendency toward imitation. The tendency toward prejudice is a tendency toward mechanism in the use of
reason. There are sentences diat announce themselves asprejudices.
Prejudices can be divided in general into
1. thepraejudidum hominis;'
2. that of the occasion of our <judgments> a) lodvelV) temporisJ
The praejudidum hominis is again of two kinds:
i. praejudidum velpersonae (for a person)
739 2. praejudidum - multitudinis (for the multitude) - this is peculiar to
women and is also quite well suited to them. {What all the world says is
true.} One who has the praejudidum multitudinis distrusts his own reason.
{The prejudice of prestige, e.g. of antiquity, which has its ground, e.g., in
thankfulness.} I{Prejudices of prestige[,] e.g. for great men[,] are often
harmful to the sciences, since by their greatness they frighten others from
competition - everyone who would like to choose this field to work in
despairs of reaching this ideal, much less of going beyond it. - Sometimes
we admire out of contempt, since what someone did was really a lot, for
the scanty representation that we had of him. Thus Mercier20 admires the
Germans, thus one admires women who accomplish something scientific.
A distinction between admiration* and wonder.' We admire the ancients not on account of the degree of their cognition, but rather for how
they advanced it so far, relative to the few aids they had. - Learnedness.
Acquaintance with the ancients. Of the respect that it deserves, we
always let much fall on the ancients themselves. - Prejudice in favor of
the ancients has some causes. One is not acquainted with the new, does
not want to be acquainted with it, due to laziness. In matters of fine art
the ancients are actually still models - in the case of other objects we
have made many advances since then. In the aesthetic, in matters of
sensation[,] the ancients were able to advance things further than we can
From Italian: broccardo, a legal rule or axiom.
commonplaces.
par excellence.
"Vorurteil, praejudicium." (Ak, "praejudicium,'; MS, "praejudicium.")
prejudice concerning the man.
a) of place or b) of time.
"Bewundern."
"Verwundern."
474
on account of their civic condition.™ Speeches to a cultivated, <refined> people in regard to the constitution of the state had to attain a
high degree of perfection < - energy - >. - Here isone basis. Thusthe
opinion does not rest on mere prejudice. If these works were to be lost
we would not get them back, because we cannot reach this condition.
Only a dead language can become a model of representation^] living
ones suffer alterations too often.}I
The praejudicium multitudinis is also of two sorts[:]
i .praejudicium eruditorum {the prejudice in favor of the learned}[;] thus
the common man trusts the learned.
2. praejudicium sensus communis. The common understanding is a kind
of sense <(pmejudicium empirismi")> [,] which, as it were, has an intuition.
{Often even learned men have a particular regard for it.} In medicine it is
the opposite, however, because they believe that it is dangerous to make
use f of learnedness haphazardly. {They believe, namely, that those 740
learned in medicine never come up with f anything based on experience
The author treats now
Of logical egoism
{Logical egoism is a selfish prejudice} This is not merely conceit but rather
a kind of logical principle, which takes as dispensable the criterion of truth,
to compare one's opinions with those of other men. {The mathematician can
never risk this - vitium subreptionis," based on subjective grounds. -} The
principle of the indifference, etc., of the judgments of others in comparison with my own is the principle of logical egoism. It is unfair to condemn''
people to keep all their judgments to themselves. For they have to communicate if they are not to lose the strong criterion of truth, to compare their
judgments with the judgments of others.
The author speaks further of the prejudice infavor of someone else —this is
exactly the opposite of the one mentioned previously. Sometimes, namely,
one elevates a great man in order to hide one's weaknesses from [one's]
contemporaries - it is a means of comparing and removing the difference.
Such an idol, whom one has raised for admiration, e.g., Aristotle, has
harmed mankind extraordinarily and always held it bound. For no one
believed that one could ever surpass this great man, hence people only
imitated. Thus the greatness of a man harmed posterity {vid. also p. 5721},
which did not have the courage to surpass him.
" "bürgerlichen Zustandes."
" prejudice in favor of empiricism.
' error ofsubreption.
p Reading "dazu zu kondemnieren" for "dafür zu kondemnieren," in accordance with a
suggestion by Hinske.
475
We come now specially to the prejudice of antiquity, the praejudicium
antiquitatis. We have the prejudice that at the time the ancients lived
nature had not yet deteriorated so much. There are also other causes.
The high estimation of antiquity is found above all among those who have
studied the ancients, <without> which study one simply cannot lay claim
to the tide of learned man - among others, [itis] merely based on imitation. {To have accepted a provisional judgment as decisive is prejudice.}
We also admire the ancients because even in the childhood of the human
race they had already come a long way. Further, it is in accordance with
thankfulness that we praise them on account of their great merits and
741 forget and overlook their weaknesses. -We ourselves, so to speak, can
someday become ancients ourselves t, if we leave behind such products
as they did, etc.
The prejudice of modernity arises from inclination. For the first man to
communicate some such thing finds merit therein. The true provisional
judgment would be that writings that have been preserved through so long
a time merely on account of their inner worth and excellence must of
course have somediing persisting and lasting.
{When we have attained certain cognitions with effort, and these, in
connection with others, constitute in a certain combination as a whole a
system, then we have a certain predilection for them. - This flows from
the nature of man[;] we t infer their truth from the connection. An
accepted ground can well serve for the explanation of many consequences
without being the correct ground.}
The prejudice of accepted dogma, praejudicium systematis. People frequently write against this. A system allows a provisional favorable judgment to its advantage. The conformity of a proposition to the whole
system proves <its> truth.
There are many volontaires in the sciences, who do not wish to stand
under any command of the school (so to speak). We must not declaim too
much against systems. Some French writers have done this. Subsequently
there is a prejudice of <lazy> trust, of easiness.
One can pass judgmenton the universalvalidity of a rule only from rules
in abstracto. E.g., One wishes to have a principle for the concept of a lie. One
must judge about this in abstracto. For if one were to look to individualcases,
many lies could be useful, e.g., Themistocles' suggestion - Aristides.22But
all infidelity is harmful.
The prejudice of shallowness. It consists in one's not going into the
depth of the cognition - namely, to subordinate marks. {Genius is completely required for a good provisional judgment.}
After this the author speaks of opposed prejudices, namely, when one has
distrust toward certain things. {Thus we can think of a prejudice against
the ancient, as well as one against the modern - Distrust toward the
whole of human cognition is called misology.} This can also apply to
476D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
oneself.* It is destructive for man if it frightens off his courage for every 742
task whatsoever; but when it is only such f that we distrust our own
powers in every occupation, then that is the most excellent situation of the
human mind.
Now we come to the doctrine
Of the probable
{A chapter in which logic can never advance much.} If I say that something is probable (even if it should be only subjective), then this concerns
quality. But if I ask how great the probability is, then I consider it as to
degree. The relation of the grounds for the truth to grounds of the opposite
is plausibility' (verisimilitudo). But the relation of the grounds for the truth
to the sufficient grounds' is probability. If I only have a ground of holdingto-be-true and no ground for proof of the opposite, then this is verisimilitudo. {The verisimile is the plausible - [the] probabile [is the] acceptable.'
Judgment concerning verisimilitudo rests on comparison of the judgments
for the truth to the grounds of the opposite. With probability, the grounds
of holding-to-be-true constitute more than half- they outweigh.} The
sufficient ground is the sum of all cases that could happen at all. Only in
mathematics can one indicate determinately the grounds of holding-tobe-true.
{HOUR, MONDAY < t>}
{All probability is found numerando[,] by counting up[,] or ponderando."
The first way requires homogeneity, e.g., throw of the dice, just as easily 3
sixes as 3 eights. I am to throw 8 with 2 dice. Here 5 cases are possible.
The probability can be counted up, is = s/36. But when something [is] to be
figured out by guesswork,1' e.g., testimony, then the grounds have to be
pondered, e.g., a man of good upbringing, etc. Where the grounds are
enumerated, I can say that it is probable, but where they are pondered,
only that it is probable to me. Likewise, one can never say this is morally
certain, but rather <I am> morally certain, i.e., it rests with me on
practical grounds[;] otherwise one may not use the word moral at all -
otherwise it is better to say certainty based on physical grounds -
theoretical.}
* "auf sich selbst Bezug haben."
' Reading "ist die Scheinbarkeit (verisimilitudo)" for "(verisimilitudo)."
Reading "der Gründe für die Wahrheit zu den zureichenden Gründen" for "der Gründe
für die zureichende Wahrheit."
' "annehmbar."
" by weighing, estimating.
1 "Wenn aber etwas zu erraten."
477
A proposition can be called probable only insofar as it lies on the way
743 toward certainty and produces certainty increasingly through homogeneous grounds. Judgments that are concerned with the supersensible (or
with the transcendent" in contrast to the immanent, which is grasped
with the senses, remains in representation). Hence in metaphysical
things, in all things a priori in general, there is no probability in the
theoretical. Here we must know or there is nothing. For our suppositions
cannot be brought to certainty in this way. Not even if several different
grounds are available. This indicates nothing further, namely, than the
fact that there are many insufficient grounds, which can never yield a
universally valid proof, and it is always a proof of uncertainty when,
instead of naming a sufficient ground, one gives several that are not
sufficient. Probability is approximation to certainty, and several grounds,
when they hold, are supposed to be combined in a proof. What is lacking
in such cases, where we are on the way toward certainty, is only a
complementum.
{ad § 176 p. 55}23 The author speaks further of doubt. We acquire a
doubt - dubitatio —subjectivelywhen our holding-to-be-true is not determined (stands in aequilibrio). In the case of suspensio judicii the grounds
must still allow a doubt. Doubt (dubium) as an objective ground of
holding-to-be-true is the judgment that I make concerning truth, or a
relation of the judgment to the subject, insofar as the subject holds something to be true. - Doubt is an objective ground, however small it may be,
for holding the opposite to be true. {The condition of holding-to-be-true
with consciousness of insufficiency is called the condition of doubt.} An
objection is a dubium of which I am conscious, i.e., insofar as it is put forth
in concepts of the understanding - insofar as it is represented obscurely, [it
is] a scruple. {This scruple can become a determinate doubt.} This can in
some cases be raised to the clarity of an objection. There are frequent
objections against judgments of the understanding that lack distinctness
{they have been answered, but they have not yet been given an answer}/
hence the handling of a scruple requires development. One has to present
what it is that the other is running up against. {When this becomes clear, it
contributes very much to the perfecting of the holding-to-be-true.} Often
one cuts a knot without untying it[;] e.g., in the quarrel about the assertion
that this world is the best one, the opponents point out that there is so
much trouble in it, particularly for man, that the world could not possibly
744 be called goodf;] and without uncovering the falsehood of this, people
customarily show that the world, <the work> of an all-wise being, cannot
be bad. {Leibniz answers the objection thus: there is a creator, whom I
cannot think otherwise than as the best, wisest being.} Difficultatem dif-
" "aufs Ueberschwengliche, Transcendente."
* "man hat ihnen geantwortet, sie sind aber noch nicht beantwortet."
478
ferre, non auferre,y when difficulties, even ones removed by grounds of
cognition, yield to similar difficulties. {E.g., the Fall [explained] by the
devil. (Dice - 36 [cases])} Another expression: obnubilare, non diluerez - to
obscure the truth still more.
{HOUR, TUESDAY}
We come nowto the condition of doubt - condition of the mind insofar as
it is conscious that it is undetermined in regard to holding-to-be-true.
Dogmatism and skepticism are opposed to one another. {The skeptical
method is that of postponing one's approval, where one is equally open to
opposing grounds.} Universal skepticism is the prejudice of accepting all
cognition in general as uncertain. Dogmatism is the prejudice of accepting the <full> certainty of cognition without holding the critique of our
faculty of reason to be necessary { - detrimental to reason}. {Dogmatic
skepticism, which declares all certainty to be impossible.}
{There are no logice dijudicata" - here there are not truths fully settled.
We must at least always answer the possible doubts against them.
Criticism is the principle of not holding judgments a priori to be true
until we have compared them with the laws of our faculty of reason. This
method is applicable and necessary only in cognitions a priori through
concepts.}
Mathematics and natural science do not need the critique of our reason. Here we do not need to investigate where the limits of these cognitions are, because everything can be set forth through intuition. - The
prejudice of dogmatism is grounded on the accomplishment of many
cognitions apriori without critique through reason. Here reason succeeds
magnificently, and hence people believe that it will also succeed in other
cases. One cannot blame Plato for coming to fantastic ideas* through
reflection on mathematics - if only the Platonists had not subsequently
carried things too far. Our concepts, as mentioned above, are mathemati- 745
cal and philosophical - the former are confirmed by themselves through
intuition, but this simply cannot occur with the latter. Toelucidate is merely
to analyze one's concepts, but to extend [is] when one goes out beyond' the
usual concepts. If one wishes to extend his cognition of reason through
mere concepts, then if no further critique occurs, one is a dogmatist.
{Hypothesis: inference that a ground is the correct one, from the sufficiency of that ground for given consequences - this supposition, in order
to be able to explain those consequences from it. ad p. 68.}2*
y to postpone the difficulty, not to remove it.
z to obscure, not to resolve.
" things adjudicated logically.
* "schwärmerische Ideen."
' Ak and MS,"hinausgeht"; Ko, "inansgeht."
479
Quite often the opposite has just as many grounds as the proposition
itself. An example - Proposition: the world has a beginning[;] opposite:
the world has no beginning. Then what would the being that made it have
done through all eternity? Metaphysics is the extension of our cognition
through concepts apriori —through construction of these - mathematics.
Our reason in its pure use is dialectical. -
The strictest skeptic, who simply is not critical any longer, can rightly be
called a dogmatic skeptic, although this appears to be contradictory. One
can catch them easily. They wish to demonstrate that no truth can be
demonstrated. They reject the arguments of the dogmatists and yet accept
certainty —in the end they say that everything in the world is uncertain,
even that everything in the world is uncertain[;] they call this cathartic or
purgative, which does away with itself as well. The skeptics usually had
much dialectical acuity, as one can see from their writings. {Persiflage -
Plato's disciple Speusippus, Arcesilaus, Carneades [are] skeptics — partial
<Pyrrho> - nothing <academic doubt>.}
The mathematician need never investigate why his propositions are a
priori. Criticism is the middle waybetween dogmatism and skepticism, the
principle of a rightful trust in one's use of reason. That which cannot be
put forth through any experience or sensible evidence is transcendent.
Just on account of this ground one can never hit upon an error, except in
the case where one can oneself prove the opposite. In these cases critique
is thus thoroughly necessary, not in mathematics, because there there are
actual facta. —Skepticism is then plainly objectionable - but the skeptical
method of testing and investigating a thing more and more has very many
advantages - the doubt ofpostponement - indagare.d —{This is the doubt
746 that has the most useful consequences for the investigation of truth.}
Academic doubt was dogmatic. They held, namely, that nothing is certain.
Pynhonic doubt appears <to> have been more a doubt of postponement.
At least it was certainly not as universal as academic doubt.
{I ad I § 181 p. 57J25 Hypothesis —Presupposition. It is a judgment which
infers from the sufficiency of a judgment for given consequences to the
actuality of the ground. Every hypothesis is in the end mere opinion -
from the sufficiency of a ground for a given consequence one cannot infer
the truth of the proposition. For other grounds could also be sufficient for
the <consequences>. {The sufficiency of the ground based on certain
given consequences still does not give a perfect inference to its truth.}
We need hypotheses and in natural science simply cannot do without
them. {Hypothesis is more than opinion[; it is] actual presupposition.}
But, what is peculiar, metaphysics also has hypotheses - not in a theoretical respect, but in a practical one.
to investigate.
480D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
I i. I The ground that I accept per hypothesin, of this the possibility must be certain
{otherwise one proceeds with just empty fictions}, e.g., a central fire.26 {Pickles in the honey pot.2' Conring thinks he has found Isis.}28
2. The consequence from the assumed ground must be given, hence it must be
actual - the cause need only be possible.
3. The consequentia <of the consequences> from their cause must be wholly
certain as well. Otherwise, how can one infer from it?
The 4th requisition [is] the unity of the assumed ground in its sufficiency in regard to the consequences. {- All the consequences mustflow
from this one assumed ground. If it is not so, dien one takes aid from
anodier new Ihypothesis I.Hypothesis^ subsidiaria —{thus one f seeks . . .
f) e.g., certain medicinals cure certain diseases. The sufficiency of a
ground for all die consequences remains uncertain, however, hence every
hypothesis [remains uncertain].}
A hypothesis, as long as it remains a hypothesis, never acquires full
certainty, i.e., no apodeictic certainty (where die opposite would be impossible)[;] it can acquire empirical certainty. We speak here only of hypotheses of theoretical cognition. But diere are also morally practical hypouheses, which are necessary in diat they occur constantly according to certain
laws. But a hypodiesis in a theoretical respect is never necessary. In a
moral respect [it is], howeverf;] e.g., duty is objectively necessary and 747
happiness subjectively necessary, certain, etc.
{ad § 184 p.s8}29 Of Persuasion and Conviction. {Persuasio male significaf . . . .f}
The distinction between persuasion and conviction is precarious. Persuasion is actually holding-to-be-true based on grounds, without investigating whether they are objective or subjective. Holding a proposition to
be true, widiout being able to distinguish whether it occurs from subjective or objective grounds. Even an honest man is incapable, as judge, of
distinguishing die subjective grounds of his judgment from the objective
ones when he is inclined favorably toward his friend's case.
We have already spoken above of science. {A cognition is systematic
when the combination it has in a whole is necessary. A system is a whole
insofar as the consciousness of its totality is possible only according to
principles. - }It Isc. science Iis actually the complex of cognitions, insofar
as they are combined in a system. This does not require that they be
rational. One must carefully distinguish an from science, however. In sensu
stricto, it is dial skill of producing sometiiing such that, even if one knows
it, one still cannot make anything. It would be called mechanical art, or
manual art, if one can [produce things] just by knowing it. Art, however, in
distinction from common skill, [is] that skill defined above in sensu stricto.
' [The word]persuasion signifies something bad.
481
{HOUR, MONDAY}
Art is the system of nonhomogeneous skills. Outside the mathematical or
intuitive and the philosophical or discursive there is another certainty that
is not objective. The ground is really subjective - it is a practically valid
certainty, namely, which must be called not moral but rather pmgmatic[;]
when one accepts something, that is, not so much according to rules of
morality, but rather according to rules of prudence. A technical rule is a
rule of art, a pragmatic rule one of prudence, a moral rule one of morality,
of virtue —duty. Practical certainty also includes moral certainty. -
748 The author speaks here of a mathematical certainty of the first and the
second degree. But there is no distinction here except that between mathematical and discursive certainty. {Merely absolute necessity is not by any
means mathematical certainty - 2 - 2 = 4. For although what is true
cannot be more true, there still remains always variety in the degree of
certainty, because there there is proof through concepts alone, but here
through intuition.}
A hypothesis means in most cases a merely arbitrary positing. Thesis, a
firm proposition.
Now the author comes to the section
Ofproofs
The constitutiva of every proof are:
1. The proof/probatio,
2. That which is supposed to be proved, probandum. This is the material of the
proof.
3. The relation between the two, that a correct consequentia follows therefrom;
e.g., everything extended is divisible, all bodies are extended, hence all bodies
are divisible, and after this the further inferences, etc.
We can call unprovable, first, that which is wholly false, and that which
is immediately certain. The latter propositions are indemonstrable, the
mediate ones demonstrable.
{HOUR}
To prove is to hold something to be true on account of a ground. We can
divide all proofs into direct {or ostensive} ones and indirect or apagogical
ones. The latter are those that one <derives> from the falsehood of the
opposite. Apagogical proofs have almost more intuitus in them than the
direct ones, because contradiction is always striking. {Apodeictic proofs -
f "Die Beweisführung."
482
with consciousness of necessity - demonstratio, a proof combined with
intuition.
One can prove much apagogically ex concessis,1 namely, when the other
has already conceded something. These are argumenta ad hominem. In
mathematics there are many such proofs. They are always excellent.
Now we want to see how they are suited for philosophy. When an 749
accepted concept itself contains a contradiction, dien the predicate can
conflict with die concept and die opposite of die predicate can too.
{Apagogical proofs are very unreliable* in philosophy.} One can prove
quite different propositions simultaneously.This often happens in philosophy. Someone can refute his opponent apagogically and be refuted by him
just as forcefully by being also reduced ad absurdum. The human will is
free. This proposition is indispensable in morals. For if men could not act
otherwise than they do act, then all laws would be in vain. The opinion of
the opposite of diis proposition is called fatalism, dial all men act only
according to certain laws determined by nature. Priestley and Price^0 had a
long dispute over this. Each brought the odier ad absurdum and nonetheless nothing came to an end. {No one proves his proposition direrte, but
always only the falsehood of die opposite. In philosophy that can easily
deceive, for one can just as well err oneself in the matter, even if one
proves that the other errs - both can quite easily be wrong.} The given
multitude of all parts is finite or infinite, i.e., all the parts of a body taken
together, and we can never do this, for every body is infinitely divisible,
one would never be finished. Hence taking all die parts together is a
contradictio in adjecto. —
The result of all diis is dial one cannot make use of apagogic proofs in
philosophy, because here one cannot present them in intuition.
An aesthetic demonstration would be one that occurs by means of a ban
mot {but is not always true}.
Now we come to the section:
Of the sources of our cognition
{The author has 3, experience, reason, and belief.} They are not of 3 kinds
but only of 2 kinds: (i.) rational, (2.) empirical. {There is a belief of reason,
but merely in a practical respect - hence this is not a separate source but
always only reason, which is either dieoretical or practical. All experience is
of 2 kinds, immediate or mediate. This latter kind is historical belief.}As for
what concerns belief, historical belief can also be called empirical[;] it is 750
always grounded on someone else's testimony and experience. But no
theoretical cognition is grounded on belief of reason; this is sufficient only
* from things conceded.
* "mißlich."
483
for practical purposes. A comparison and combination of truth toward a
cognition. Experience is an operation of the understanding,hence perception does not at all suffice. Historical belief is connection of the experiences
of others with my own. {It is a matter of determining what justifies me in
respecting mediate experience as immediate - on what authority rests.}
The witness who is an eyewitness, testis oculatus,{who has immediate experience himself,} is authentic. He is irrefutable when he can know the truth and
wants to say it. Thus capacity and integrity are both requisita.
Testis auritus.' In the series of such witnesses there is often nothing but
rumor - rumor <sine capite>> - the more of these there are, the more
uncertain is the rumor. It is like the copy of a copy. {The longer the chain,
the more uncertain. Tradition [is] where the first witness is unknown. If
you believed, you would not trace the rumor back to the first ground. The
competence is simply not to be settled. -} But the greater the multitude
of coordinate witnesses, the more believable the rumor is.- The best
means for passing judgment on the integrity of a person with whose
character one is otherwise unfamiliar is not by whether he had an interest
in the matter or not. Many rules of prudence are involved here, which may
not be introduced in logic, however.
Now we want to touch on the concept of belief insofar as it is not a
source of cognition but rather a mere judgment of reason, insofar as it no
longer has a theoretical but rather a merely practical purpose. {Unbelieving with respect to the practical - to belief of reason[;] disbelieving1 with
respect to the theoretical, to historical belief. In Latin there is no word for
unbelieving. Someone is unbelieving who does not want to accept something based on moral grounds (which are sufficient as springs of morality),
e.g., the existence of a highest being. - }
A hypothesis, which one holds to be necessary in a practical respect,
e.g., a businessman finds a ground that is sufficient for undertaking something. E.g. A general must necessarily judge and decide something when
751 he faces the enemy. Here hypothesis is not optional,"1 then, in order to
explain something, but instead is necessary in a practical respect. In the
first case the purpose would be theoretical, however. All practical purposes (- legislations of reason) are either (i.) pragmatic or (2.) moral, i.e.,
either rules of prudence or laws of morality. Thus that general's purpose
is pragmatic. Belief, regarded as a hypothesis, becomes necessary for a
moral purpose, [and] can be called pure belief of reason." The concept of
' A hearsay witness.
;
rumor <without a source>.
* "'Ungläubig."
1 "ungläubisch."
" "beliebig."
" "reiner Vernunftglaube."
484
duty is wholly distinct from that of advantage. The posited end of fulfillment of duties is furtherance of the highest good, insofar as one can attain
it here, the happiness of man[;] the unification of morality, worthiness to
be happy, with happiness itself, does not lie in any man's power. If we see
that our sources of cognition do not suffice for cognizing God as moral
being, then we can nonetheless have a moral belief thereby. {Practical
belief does not extend cognition, it is only the transition from the theoretical to the practical.}
Our author speaks now of the perfection of practical cognition, a chapter that actually does not especially belong to logic.
Of practical cognition
One sees that what he says about it does not actually belong to logic. It
would be good to leave merely speculative things to religion. A speculative
cognition is that which has no application practically. Practical propositions are either imperatives - then they areopposed to theoretical ones -
or they are grounds for possible imperatives, and then they are opposed to
merely speculative ones. E.g. There is a God[;] this is no merely speculative proposition but rather a practical one. For it contains grounds for
possible imperatives.
{Practical propositions <are ones that> contain grounds of cognition
for possible imperatives. The proposition, There is another life, is practical, because it contains grounds for possible imperatives. —Theoretical
propositions are also called practical when they contain such grounds.
Those propositions that contain no such grounds at all are also speculative. Imperatives determine to action.}
Now we go to a new section:
Of concepts 752
All cognition isthrough intuition or concept - representation isan elementary expression which cannot be further analyzed. Representation may be
combined also with apperception - the consciousness of the representation.
{ad p. i4}3' A representation combined with consciousness is called
perception, perceptio. This perceptio becomes cognitio insofar as the representation is related with consciousness to an object. Now this representation is again of two kinds:
1. intuitus - this is not yet a cognition,
2. conceptus, contains that which is common to several objects, nota
communis. A concept, considered by itself, is:
a) conceptus empiricus —when there is sensation in its representation
485
{for whose existence it is required that experience precede. The material
of all empirical representation is sensation.}
b) conceptus purus, this is called a notio. It can be called a pure concept
of the understanding. The concept of a triangle is a conceptus Ia I priori.
{A concept is a repraesentatio discursiva. —The action whereby we give to
a concept the corresponding intuition is called exhibition." Cognition is
more than conceptus, more than intuitus, it is both together. We seek objective reality, which we attain through application to intuition.}
An ideaL is a concept of reason for which no object can be given
adequately in intuition.
Representation, if it arises from the understanding, is always a concept.
But the intuition of red does not yet give any concept of the understanding. —The representation of something as cause can only occur
through the understanding, hence is a notio. {One can never experience a
cause - for causality is a notio} Allintuition is only a representation ofthat
which is given to us through the senses. Where it occurs - e.g., with
mathematical concepts - there are never any notiones —pure concepts of
the understanding^] but of course [there are] conceptus a priori. {Conceptus
purus: (i.) intelledualis, (2.) mtionalis. A conceptus purus intellectuals is
called a notio - e.g., virtue. A conceptus purus, to which no corresponding
intuition can be given, [is called an] ideaL, e.g., of God. -1 can give
examples of virtue. Nonetheless it is not a concept of experience. Ontology has to do with nothing but notions. - Concepts, as to their matter, are
753 dati or factitiif The former are called notiones, the latter empirical concepts. (Conceptus arbitrarii, arbitrary ones). Every concept of experience is
made. Perception is only subjective - not yetexperience. This is cognition
with consciousness of the relation to the object.}
Sensibility involves two things, sense and imagination. There are merely
logical concepts - so-called aesthetic concepts are merely representations
without a concept. There are a priori pure concepts of the understanding,
but also sensibly determined concepts of the understanding, {ad § 255}.
Experience means empirical cognition. With an empirical representation something must be perceived (sensed with consciousness). Hence
experience presupposes empirical intuition and a concept. Sensation is
indispensable for this. Transcendental philosophy, which must precede
metaphysics, deals with the origin of pure concepts of the understanding.
Logic does not do this. It is occupied only with actual actions. For the use
of a concept abstraction is required, but the concept is still not made
thereby. The latter occurs (i.) through the fact that something is considered as a partial representation, which can be common to several, e.g., the
red color. (2.) When I consider the partial representation as a nota, as
° "Darstellung, exhibitio."
p given [or] made.
486D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
ground of cognition of a thing, e.g., I cognize blood, a rose, etc., through
red. The 3rd action is abstraction, to consider* this partial representation
as ground of cognition, insofar as I ignore all other partial representations.
A concept is thus a partial representation, insofar as I thereby abstract
from all others.
{To abstract is in the philosophical sense a negative concept - not to
attend. There are not abstrad concepts. We can only abstractfrom something,
from certain differences, marks of things. The distinction between abstract
and concrete lies not in the concept but in the usus conceptuum.'
A concept can be contained in other concepts (a part of them), but the
others can at the same time be under it, it can be their ground. These two
are only the various relations of the same concept, which can quite well be
at the same time part and ground of something. Man is the partial representation of Negro, of someone learned (for a part of the concept of this,
etc., is of course always that he is a man), but at the same time this concept
is also the ground of cognition, under which the white man, the Negro,
the learned man belong.}
Through abstraction, however, nothing is produced, but rather left out. 754
We must not say that I abstract a representation, but rather that I abstract
from a representation. I can either abstract from the variety of the things to
which this concept is common, or I can attend to this in comparison with
others. This is actually the use of the concept, in the first5 case inabstracto,
in the second case in concreto.
The faculty for the use of concepts in concreto is called the common
understanding, the faculty, etc., in abstracto,is called the speculative understanding. The abstract concept <is> contained <in the> concrete one
and itself <contains> the concrete one under itself. A higher concept is
one that comprehends several in itself. Repraesentatio singularis —has an
intuitum, indicates it immediately, but is at bottom not a conceptus. E.g.,
Socrates is not a conceptus.
{HOUR, MONDAY}
As soon as I make use of words, the representation is an individual
concept. If the concept is expressed with particularity/ however, one considers it" in abstracto. Then it is no longer called a conceptus universalis but
rather communis. A conceptus communis can be called superior^ in regard to
other concepts that are contained under <it>" {a higher concept}, infeq Reading "als Erkenntnisgrund zu betrachten" for "als Erkenntnisgrund."
' useof concepts.
* Ak, "im erstem"; MS and Ko, "im ersten."
' "Wird aber der Begriff ganz besonders ausgedrückt."
" Reading "ihn" for "es."
" Reading "unter <ihn>" for "in <ihm>."
487
riorL in regard to those under which" it is contained. {The inferior^ (lower)
always contains more in itself, the former Ii.e., the superior^ Imore under
itself but less in itself. For the conceptus superior is wholly universal just by
virtue of the fact that it contains little in itself, e.g., the concept [of] man
under that of animal. Hence this latter [is] a conceptus superior, since it
contains more under itself, although it contains less in itself. Here we
ignore the property of the understanding (in man). The higher the
concept - the simpler. Living corporeal being - still higher[,] corporeal
being[;] simple. The highest: being, thing[;] the simplest. If we look to the
content of a concept, then we consider it in concrete. If we look to the
sphaera, then we consider it in abstracto. —Of the first kind is cognition of
practical people' - (with mole's eyes - merely onthe spot").}
Every conceptus communis, in regard <relation> to the conceptus under
<which it> is contained, is called speciesL[;] in regard to those that are
755 contained under it, genusL. {The concepts ofgenusL and species^ are different merely in respect of relation.} Now what was called genusL in one
respeäus I can call species^ in another, [;] e.g., man [is] in numerous respects
a genusL, but in relation to animal [is] nonetheless a speciesL. Can we find a
genus summum? The genus summum is that which is contained under no
other, is not a partial concept, i.e., has no further part. Now if there is a
genus summum, an object in general, can one also find a species infima? One
must assume that there are conceptus communes under which one cannot
subsume any others. But it remains merely arbitrary, and hence one
cannot say that a species infima can be found.
In the subordination of human concepts we begin with the lowest step,
with the Individuum - this is reckoned as a conceptus singularis. From there
we go to the conceptus superior— or communis. E.g., oak tree {ilex in Spain,
the wonderful acorns that taste like chestnuts} - growing things —plants -
bodies —substances. Finally we come per analysin to the concept of a thing.
The conceptus superior is always only a part of the inferior^, so that the
conceptus summus [contains] the least of all in itself- object, where one has
not determined at all what - but it contains everything else under itself.
Our cognition gains uncommonly [much] if we always go to the conceptus superior. The multitude of things that are contained under the
concept is called the logical sphaera of the concept. The greater this is, the
smaller is its content. {The sphaera is latissime patens,z the simpler and
more abstract the concept is. We understand by this not the content but
rather the circle of application, a line that has in itself no breadth but
nonetheless comprehends a great space. A concept that has no sphaera at
all, e.g., that of the individualJulius Caesar is = to a point.}
* Reading "unter die" for "in denen."
' "der Praktiker."
3 "bloß auf dem Fleck."
2
open to the broadestextent.
488
Some concepts have one and the same sphaera, like the concept of the
necessary and the unalterable. Such concepts are called conceptus redproci,
convertible concepts. Latior I conceptus I," when I one I understands still
more thereunder. If one wished to undertake a consideration and a comparison between metal and wood, then these are conceptus heterogenei, have
no respectus at all in regard to their quantity, e.g., 100 years - German
miles, {because none of these concepts that are compared with one another stands under the other. -} Conceptus redproci must be homogeneous. One really should not say conceptus universal!*. Only the application 756
can be used in abstracto, and then the concept is quoad usum universalis or
particularis,b etc. A conceptus is always a repraesentatio communis[;] in logic
there are no others.
There are various kinds of differentia^. They are, namely:
1. generica - [this] is the variety of genera/ e.g., physicians name several
diseases -
materiaf sui generis.
2. specified - [this] is the differentiation of things that belong to a common
genusL - in the species^ there must be something that was not contained in the
genusL.
3. numerica —i.e.,the distinction of the conceptus singulares, insofar as they are not
common to several. Among men we indicate them by nomina propria.'
Of definitions
The logical perfection of definition consists:
1. in distinctness[;] it is the highest requirement of definition.
2. in completuda or in distinctness through sufficient marks.
3. praedsio —precision, i.e., the separation of everything else that is not required
for sufficient distinctness.
{Precision is a requirement of the 2nd degree for definition. No more
marks than necessary. Definition is the highest logical perfection of a
concept.}
Conceptus adaequatus in minimis terminis —conceptus completus, praedse
determinatusf If the concept has these requirements, then it is a conceptus
rei adaequatus.1
Now we will show how definitions are made.
All concepts are of two kinds, namely:
" Broader I conceptI.
* universal [or] particular as to its use.
"der Gattungen, generum."
4 [Their] matters [are] distinct, each of its own kind.
' propernames.
A concept that is adequate, in minimal terms —a completeconcept, determined precisely.
s
concept adequate to the thing.
489
1. conceptus dati, and these are either
a) empirici — given aposteriori,
b) rationati - given a priori. - {E.g., concept of cause, quantity, substance,
action, time, and space. We cannot observe space[.] It is not an
empirical representation. For this latter always rests on perception.}
2. conceptus factitii <- made - fabricated - > - they canbe made*
a) ex datis a posteriori,'
b) ex datis a priori.'
757 All definitions of given concepts, if they are given a priori, are always
analytic, all definitions of concepts that are made are without distinction synthetic.
{A synthetic definition, one that arises from many concepts taken together. I make for myself the concept of a quadratum (est reäangulum
quadrilaterum aequilaterum)k through the definition. This latter precedes
the concept, then. It is always so in synthesis.
Analysis. I seek out marks in the concept that I already have. This
requires: (i.) <Exposition of the concept> (e.g., body. Through the
exposition we attain the elementary propositions for the definition. Here,
too, the 3 requisita. Body. Extended, composite, divisible [ - this] lies in it
already.)
Mathematical definitions can never be false, because mathematics
makes its concepts itself. - Definitions of concepts of experience are synthetic. They can actually never be defined, only described.}
An empirical concept can also be defined' analytically. In this case not
merely is the concept given, but also the object. If, e.g., one wished to
define water, then one would <only> define one's concept of it, not the
object itself. It is the same with all other concepts of experience. One can
of course define them themselves, but not the object, because we cannot
find all the marks. With all concepts of experience, the definition of the
concept is in and of itself wholly dispensable. - (It is in fact wholly subjective.) Conceptus dati can usefully be defined only insofar as they are given a
priori. —My definition never becomes complete in regard to the object
and eo ipso never becomes a definition.
Thus far we have treated of given concepts and we come now to those
that are made. All definitions here are synthetic, for at the basis there
always lie dataL that are put together. All mathematical definitions are
synthetic. All approximations to concepts of experience, observations, are
synthetic. But the synthesis is not arbitrary, the concept is thus notarbitmrie
* Reading "gemacht" for "gegeben."
' from things given aposteriori.
' from things given a priori.
* square (it is a four-sided equilateral rectangle).
' Reading "definiert" for"gegeben."
490
factitius.™ The mathematician can never err, only lack in precision. E.g.,
Wolff in the definition of the circle, which one can comprehend more
concisely than he did. Hence he did not err but only failed in precision.
{HOUR} 758
Definition is the declaration of the representations that I make for myself
of the object. Concepts that are made also include those that arise from
perceptions. If a definition of these is possible, it cannot be other than
synthetic. But we can define concepts of experience only nominally {describe [them]. Description differs from definition in not having the requirements of completudo and precision.}
Now we proceed to concepts given a priori. All definitions of concepts
given a priori are defined per analysin. {The beginning here is always
exposition - (not definition).} E.g., the concept of right. It is not innate in
us, of coursef;] <rather,> to produce it we had to reflect concerning it -
in the concept of virtue is contained, first - lawfulness for actions, then
lawfulness for right actions, then in addition freedom. {Which stands in
conflict with the inclinations, - in this it is distinct from holiness.}
In the analysis ofa concept the ist thing - the exposition - is gradually
to become conscious of the manifold that is contained in my consciousness^] 2ndly - definition, when the exposition is complete. But now how
can we ever become certain whether we have expounded a concept perfectly? In such cases one must be very cautious, e.g., in those of substance
and cause - concepts that are pure a priori. {In philosophical definitions
one can never be fully conscious of completudo - not to be conscious that
something is lacking is quite different from being conscious that nothing
is lacking.}
Note. In the case of given concepts, one must never begin with definition but always with exposition. But with concepts that are made - cone,
factitii," e.g., mathematical ones, definition must always precede. Exposition begins with elementary propositions. In regard to coordinate concepts, there can never be any definition or demonstration, if one takes the
words strictly. These words pertain actually only to f mathematics. Nevertheless, insofar as we suspect completudo, we call it in philosophydefinition. It is not always necessary to define. -
Now we proceed further and will treat
Of the rules for definitions 759
Passing judgment on definitions involves the following rules:
" made arbitrarily (reading "factious" for "factious").
" concepts that are made (reading "factitii" for "facticii").
491
1. whether the preferred definition, as a proposition, is true,
2. whether the definition, as a concept, is distinct. -
Two things hamper the distinctness of a concept, namely,
a) when the marks are tautological [and] I explain idem per idem."
b) when I explain obscurum per aequeobscurum?
The 3rd criterion is whether the concept, as a distinct concept, is
exhaustive {completudo},
the 4th, whether the concept that I regard as exhaustive is precise
{precision}. How are definitionsto be made?
1. Seek several elementary propositions (here the talk is of analytical [definitions]).
2. See to it that the predicate is not just as obscure as the concept that you want
to explain. -
3. Collect several such predicates, until you are certain that together they exhaust the whole concept.
4. See to it that one mark does not already contain another and hence can be
dispensed with. (Through this one still does not learn to make definitions.)
The most useful of all the rules is that one must begin with exposition,
through which one attains elementary propositions of a definiton. In the
case of an analytic definition we always reserve the right to extend our
concept and perhaps even to opine the opposite in the future. If no
concept lies at the basis, then I cannot speak of the thing at all. But this is
always possible when we have made the concept clear. One must be
especially cautious about making a definition that does not reciprocate,
that does not convert. All definitions in philosophy must be regarded as
tentaminaq for philosophizing.
As for what concerns quantity, the perfection of a definition rests on the
fact that the definitio is reciprocal with the definitum, that one can put one
in place of the other. {When the sphaera of a definition is equal to the
sphaera of the definitum.} Definitio nee sit latior nee angustior definite.' A
conceptus is latior than another when it contains fewer, angustior when it has
more determinations. This is the consequence, namely, of the narrowing
of the concept.
Quality in logic - distinctness. The logical requisite:
760 Ne definiatur obscurum per aeque obscurum.1
2. Logical relation is the relation of the marks in the definition to
the concept of a definitum. Every ground generaliter must be something
the same by the same.
the obscure by the equally obscure.
attempts.
The definition should be neither broader nor narrower than the thing defined.
The obscure is not to be defined by the equally obscure.
492
other than the consequence[;] without this it is not a ground. The third
rule is
3. Non definiendum in circulo, i.e., [do not] explain circulo, idem per idem.1
When the identity is obvious, then this is called tautological. {As in: Ratio
est id, per quod cognoscimus, cur aliquid sit." Cur" means, however, quam ob
rationem." The explanation is thus wholly tautological, says nothing new.}
But if it is hidden, then we call this method explaining in a circle. The
fourth rule:
4. Modality - necessity is here the logical perfection. An empirical
proposition does not contain it. Empirical concepts cannot be defined at
all.
Definitions can be divided into
nominal and- for distinction from the other - real definitions,* which
are sufficient for derivation of all predicates and concepts. Through real
definitions7 we have insight into the possibility of things. Nominal definitions2 serve merely I to I distinguish a thing. A nominal definition that
would be sufficient for distinguishing the thing from all others would be
just as good as a real definition. Mathematical definitions are all real.
Description is distinct from definition in that it contains only the historical." The exposition of a concept in which it remains undetermined
whether it is complete or precise is a description.
{HOUR, MONDAY}
Of the division of concepts
{It consists in the distinct representation of all lower concepts, insofar as
they are contained under a higher one and are opposed to one another.}
Logical division*is called divisionr and is distinct from the taking apart'' or
analysis of the concept. By divisio logica is understood not the taking apart
of the concept itself (divisio realis) but rather - of its sphaem. E.g., the
concept of man has a sphaera - not a manifoldness in itself, but rather it
comprehends many others under itself. {A division of trees, e.g., into
crown, trunk, root, would be partitio, not divisio.
' circularly, i.e., the same by the same.
" A ground is that through which we know why something is.
' Why.
* because of what ground.
* "Realerklärungen."
" "Sacherklärungen."
z "Nominalerklärungen."
" "nur Historisches."
* "Division."
' "Einteilung."
d "Teilung."
493
761 Partitio is different from divisio - the latter divides merely the concept.
Logical division is always dichotomy, a or non a. All living beings are
mortal or non-mortal. This is analytical division according to the principle
of contradiction. The principle of all logical divisions is the principium
exclusi medii inter duo contradictoria.' Synthetic division is into a and b.
Polytomy presupposes real cognition, not merely cognition of form. - In
this case one can never become certain of the completeness of his division. To be fair one would have to be able to survey how much [is]possible.
But there are concrete concepts, objects of experience. Here only partitio
is possible.}
All division can occur into opposita or into disparata. The first can also
be made apriori, but empirical division (divisionof experience) is only into
disparata, e.g., the various races of man, red-brown, yellow, etc.[;] I one I
into opposita would be if I said, All men are eidier white or non-white.
Now we want to go dirough the points that pertain to the division of a
concept.
1. The divided concept, conceptus divisus, whose sphere can be divided.
2. The membra dividentia, the lower ones, which are contained under
die higher ones. They are members of the division, which, put together,
form a complete whole. One cognizes diis when they are adequate to the
sphere. A division expresses, then, that lower concepts subordinated to
higher ones are together equal to the whole sphere of the concept.
A given division can be considered in relation to its subdivisions-^ Division of a member of die division>, which go quite far, to the individuum
and to its codivisions/ e.g., men, respective^ to <i.> learnedness, <2.>
sex, <3_, 4_> etc. The members of the codivision are called membra
codividentia.
We come now to die actual rules. The first is:
1. The conceptus must not be latiorh than all the membra dividentia' taken together[;] the less in itself, the more under itself. {Then it contains too much.}
2. The conceptus must not be angustior-' than the membra dividentia either.
3. Between the terms of the division there must be oppositions, and these are
762 taken together disjunaive^, i.e., through either or. {The membra dividentia must
be opposed to one another or else it is not logical division.}
4. The divided concept must not contradict the concept of the division.
5. The members of the subdivision must not come under the members of the
superdivision, that would be contradictory. E.g., to the ignorant we must
oppose, not the learned, but rather him who has science.
' principle ofthe excluded middle between two contradictories.
f "Untereinteilungen, Subdivisionen."
8 "Nebeneinteilungen <Codivisionen>."
* broader.
' members of the division.
' narrower.
494
6. I must derive the number of the members of the division from the nature of the
divided concept. Every empirical division can be called partition rather than
divisio logica. {With the latter, one must know that there are neither more nor
fewer terms of the division[;] with empirical division this need not be so. - }
Logical division <which abstracts from all content> cannot be other
than dichotomy <2 terms>-a —non «-according to the principle of
contradiction. {This is the principle of all analytic judgments.} Polytomy,
trichotomy, etc. - divisions that arenotmade according tothis principle -
are always synthetic. {Synthetic divisions - trichotomy, polytomy in general. - It is striking that trichotomy appears so often, subst f God:
(holiness, goodness, justice). Here there is, as it were, a highest proposition or a condition <a conditioned> a consequence f [;] unity [is] the
condition, manyness the conditioned, allness the consequence, combination {allness —manyness as unity) of both together.}
Of judgments
The representation that is universal through its consciousness as the
representation of a mark is a clear concept. The consciousness ofa universal representation (repraesentatio communis) is called not merely a concept,
then, but a clear concept. A concept that becomes clear through a judgment is called a distinct concept, and a concept that becomes distinct
through an inference of reason is called a concept of reason (according to
Wolff, a complete concept).
{Judgment is the representation of the unity of given concepts, insofar
as one is subordinated to the other or excluded from it. -
1. Clear concept, through consciousness of universality.
2. Distinct concept, not merely through apprehensio, but rather -judicium. 763
3. Concept of reason.
j Judgments:
1. Where one [is]under the other as t subject under predicate: categorical.
2. The judgment where one concept [is] under the other as conditioned under
the condition t, as consequence under the ground: hypothetical.
3. The judgment that contains a consequence which can f be divided disjunctive: QPJ.}32
To act means to separate the cause from the effect. If a concept is to
become distinct, then one must always make a judicium. The mark becomes at once the predicate of the judgment, e.g., man is an animal. This
distinct concept comes to be only through a judgment. From this we see
that before one gets to distinct concepts, one must treat judgments.
A concept of reason arises out of an inference of reason. E.g. All men
495I M M A N U E L KANT
are living beings, all living beings are animals, ergoL t all men are animals.
One can infer f a nota remota, then, only through a nota media, through an
inference of reason. Hence one should rather treat inferences, should
take up the three operations of thought right at first. This was Aristotle's
manner - very stringent. - It was Wolff who broke itoff.
A judgment is the representation of the relation of concepts among one
another, through which a cognition becomes distinct. A great mistake in
this logic, that the author speaks immediately of subject and predicate
{before, that is, the more necessary f prior cognitions* are set forth[;] it is
thus in every f logic}. Our author's definition of judgment fits only categorical ones. {We do not have just one kind of judgment - }But there are
also hypothetical ones, problematic ones. {3 relations: (i.) of inherence,
(2.) of dependence, (3.) of parts to each other, which together make a
whole.}
All judgments may be reduced to 3 kinds: i. categorical f ones, which
contain the relation of predicate to subject.
2. hypothetical f onesf;] they contain the relation of ground to consequence. <If the soul is not composite, then etc.>
{What is not composite is not perishable. The soul is not composite, the
soul is not perishable.}
764 3. disjunctive onesf;] they contain the relation of a divided concept to
the whole sphere of the division <e.g., all men are learned or nonlearned>. These judgments are of a completely different kind but have
this in common, that <they> can always be expressed categorically, too
(nonetheless, it might not alwayswork).
{There are kinds of difference, numerical - specific - toto genere different. - Wewent thus upwards from below. Learned men are specifically
the same and generically, too, and nonetheless numerically different[,] as
C. andj.}33
We proceed now to
Categorical judgments
In logic, matter is the given. {Form, in logic, is the way of putting together
and connecting given concepts.} In categorical judgments the subject and
the predicate must be given. In all categorical judgments negation <the
sign of negation> must affect the copula <not the predicate>, or else
they are not negative judgments. {Anima non est <copula> mortalis,1 would
be a negative judgment. A. est immortalh <non mortalis>m would be
affirmative.} Judgments whose predicates are merely negative {e.g., non-
* "Vorkenntnisse."
' The soul is not <copula> mortal.
™ The soul is immortal <non-mortal>.
496
m. - that which Iis outside I the sphere Im. 1} are called infinite judgments <judicia infinita> {because there is no end of those things that are
non a[;] but a can be determined}.
Of the condition of unconditioned judgments
{Every judgment has the condition oftruth - the ground for one's attributing to it a predicate.} In every judgment there must be something in the
subject that makes the predicate be attributed to it, and this is called die
condition. E.g., every body, as an extended being, is divisible. Or another
example: all men, as finite beings, are capable of mistakes (faillible). Now
this, again, is not called a conditioned judgment, but a restricted one. If
the latter is removed, then it becomes conditioned. The restriction is
called the determination ofthejudgment." - Sometimes diese determinations lie in the concept, sometimes they are added.
We come now to die division of judgments[:]
1. as to quality they are either affirmative or negative <and infinite>, e.g., some 765
men are not learned - a negative judgment
2. as to quantity all judgments are either
a) universalia, are expressed by all,
b) particularia[;] instead of this expression rather plural" judgments.
We can consider every predicate in itself as a terminus major. There are
universal judgments that are expressed not universally,only plurally, e.g.,
All rational beings are thinking beings/ some men are rational beings,
some men are diinking beings, etc. There are 3 sorts of judgments as to
quantity, namely, universal, particular, and singular. A judicium singulare
permits no exceptions because it has no sphaera.
I {The judicium genemle is in general distinct from the universal judgment.* It occurs where there are only a few exceptions, where by this
judgment oner runs the least risk of erring, hence one can say it generaliter.
Such judgments can occur only in die empirical.} I
A categorical judgment has eidier 2 subjects and one predicate or 2
predicates and one subject or only one subject and only one predicate.
We come
3. to relation[;] as to this, we divide1 judgments into
a) categorical ones. The relation of subject to predicate.
b) hypothetical ones. The relation of ground to consequence. { —2 judg-
" "die Bestimmung des Urteils (determinatio judicii)."
° "pluralistische."
f Reading"Wesen" for "Menschen," following a suggestion by Hinske.
1 "vom allgemeinen <universellen> Urteil."
' Ak, "wodurch man diese Unheil"; MS, "woman durch dieses Urtheil."
' Reading "teilen wirdie Urteile ein" for "teilen wir die Urteile."
497
ments are in the relation where one grounds the other. If the one is true,
then so is the other. With the hypothetical judgment there can only be 2
propositions, - with the disjunctive there canbe several.}
c) disjunctive ones. The relations of members of the divided concept, of
parts of the sphere to the whole sphere.
The categorical f <absolute> judgment contains only the relation of 2
concepts, but the hypothetical and the disjunctive of two or more judgments f. {A proposition' is an assertoric judgment.}
That which is the ground in ajudicium hypotheticum is called antecedens,
the connection with the last is called the copula, the <inference"> following from the two judgments is called the consequentia. The matter of the
766 hypothetical judgment consists not of 2 concepts but of two judgments,
whose relation is the consequentia. {A hypothetical judgment consists of
two problematic ones - these are its matter. The inference" of the consequens from the antecedens is called the consequentia. The hypothetical judgment does nothing but draw the consequentia from the two problematic
propositions.}
Now an example of the judicium disjunctivum: All bodies are either fluid
or solid. <If this world is not the best, then I God I either was unfamiliar
with a better or did Inot Iwish to create it or could I not create I [it], etc.>
{Together these constitute the whole sphaera}
4. Modality (determination of the connecting concept).1" The 3 determinations of
the copula {or of the connecting concept} (above all for categorical judgments)
are:
a) problematic judgments, contain logical possibility,
b) assertoric judgments, contain logical actuality {truth},
c) apodeictic judgments, contain logical necessity.
{HOUR, FRIDAY}
The author says that ajudicium without modality is ajudicium purum. A
judgment is called exponibile because a thought or concept is expressed as
simple, although in fact it is composite, and in fact is composed of an
affirmative and a negative, e.g., few men are virtuous. {This means that
some men are virtuous, many men are not virtuous, hence an affirmative
and a negative judgment.} {A composite judgment, where 2 judgments
have one predicate.} Those judgments which {are aesthetic}[,which]
merely represent the subjective in relation to a faculty of cognition, are not
<purely> logical. E.g., when one makes a description of mountains and
"Propositio oder Satz."
"Schlußfolge."
Reading "Schlußfolge"for "Folge."
"Verbindungsbegriff."
498D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
in doing so relates not universallyvalid concepts of their size and position,
but rather merely the sensations produced by them in us.
{Theoretical judgments are those that determine an object as possible.
Practical ones signify the actions for making it actual.}
Practical propositions relate to actions, through which the proposition
becomes possible.
{An unprovable judgment can nonetheless be true. - All immediately 767
certain propositions are unprovable.} To demonstrate can have 2 meanings. -
An empty judgment {what contains no ground of any cognition, thus
tautological judgments} is a judgment which contains no concept, which is
wholly indistinct, when I explain obscurumper aeque obscurum.* An empty
judgment can be obviously or covertly [empty]. {Identical judgments are
not on that account empty. - Alldefinitions are identical with the defined
concept. Identity can also be cognized through analysis.}
If the identitas [is] explicita, then the judgment is tautological - if one
mark is named twice. Not everything unprovable is an identical proposition. Synthetic propositions are included too. When I have transformed
identitas impliata into explicita, then I have accomplished the analysis.
The author speaks now of unprovable judgments.Axioms are unprovable <immediately certain> propositions. {They are possible only in
mathematics.} Even if some things should be discoverable per analysin, the
mathematician does not want this. For this is not his business, since he
produces everything through construction of concepts in intuition. {Axioms are always synthetic propositions, namely, those that one can put
forth in an intuition <through> intuitus purus. Analyticalpropositions are
not identical Iwith these I.}
A postulate is a practical proposition concerning what is to be done,
without showing the way, because it assumes that everyone can do what it
recommends as imperatives. {For in logic it depends not on matter but
always on form.}
Judgments are either intuitive (insofar as it is concerned with an object
that may be exhibited in intuition) or discursive (whose object is exhibited
through a concept).
A judgment of perception is intuitive (not discursive). An empirical
judgment is intuitive, but experience is nonetheless discursive. Judgments
of experience are always discursive, because we always connect perceptions with them. [It is] a vitium subreptionisy if one holds what is only a
judgment of perception to be a judgment of experience.
A theorema is a theoretical proposition insofar as it is capable of a proof.
{A deduction that one draws through an inference is a corollarium
" the obscure through the equally obscure.
y
error of subreption.
499
conseäarium.} A problem2 is a practical proposition, since one must accept
what one is ordered to do.
768 {HOUR, MONDAY}
An axiom [is] a proposition that comes immediately from the definition. It
presupposes intuition, really, or at least immediate certainty a priori. A
practical proposition that needs and is capable of a solution is called a
quaestio problematis {a proposition that determines the action that is supposed to happen}. The representation of the way in which the object is
brought to be is called a resolutio. The proof that - when one has proceeded thus - this follows: demonstratio. Apostulate is capable neither of a
resolution nor of a demonstration. The resolution of the problem is complete when everything is contained therein, [e.g.,] when the proportion
has been completely resolved. This does not always apply in mathematics,
but one can approximate it as much as one wishes, e.g., the measuring of
the diameter ofthe earth. - Exactitude - precision presupposes that it [is]
complete - that it does not contain too little, nor too much.
In the case of resolutions in things practical, one does not take things so
exactly and is satisfied when one has the means, whose power one prefers
to be too strong rather than too weak. {E.g., levers, pullies, preferably too
much power rather than toolittle. - Test - to bring back to the given -
what one has analyzed. -}
Qualität occulta, a method common in scholastic philosophy, according to
which they held the name of the effect of the cause to be insight into the
cause itself. {Tautology in the determination of the cause - e.g., instinct,
horror vacui," idiosyncrasy, etc. - one is often deceived through this. -
Nothing is cause of itself* - the cause must always be something else than
the causatum —the effect.} evTE^exia' - the name ofa cause unknown to us.
We are still naming certain propositions in a system {and, indeed, in a
dogmatic system}. A corollarium is a proposition that can be deduced from
another proposition through a single inference. Corollaria can be theoretical or practical. The author often presupposes cognitions'' on the part of his
readers and makes corollaries which would still be theorems for beginners.
This is always relative to capacities. Pffr^ftranslated corollarium as addition'
<better, deduction^, scholion as note.*Scholion - aresting place[;] bythisis
z "Eine Aufgabe."
* abhorrence of a vacuum.
* "von sich selbst Ursach."
' entelechy (i.e., that which gives form or actuality to asubstance).
J "Kenntnisse."
' "Zusatz."
f "Folgerung."
1 "Anmerkung."
500D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
understood that which is regarded not as a constituent part of a system but
rather as explanation. Scholia^ can also contain the value,the reality,and the
history of the proposition, who said it first. Finally comes the name lemma^ 769
{where one takes something from another system}[; it] does not belong to
the territorio of the discipline; est peregrinum aliquid' { - a digression^ - }.
Immediate inferences (consequential immediatae) are deductions of one
proposition from another, the two being distinct from one another not as
to matter but <merely> as toform. These have no medius terminus. Immediate inferences are inferences that cannot be transformed into inferences
of reason except through tautological subsumptions. {E.g. All men are
mortal, some mortals are men[;] this is a consequentia immediata. An inference of reason: All men are mortal is the majorL, atquik some mortals are
mortal, this is the minorL, a tautological subsumption. ErgoL some mortals
are men, the conclusion. Now since tautological propositions are empty,
we leave out the minorL and the conclusion follows immediately.} Tautological judgments can be regarded as empty because they contribute nothing at all to distinctness, e.g., all men are mortal, some men are men
(tautological), some men are mortal.
According to our author the first consequentia immediata is to be called
1. perjudiria aequipollentia.11 infer from one judgment to another that means just
the same. The ground must always be distinct from the consequence.
Now we will go through 4 consequentiae immediatae. The first —per
judicia subalternata, where I infer from the universal to the particular.
(quoad quantitate1"}
2. Per judicia opposita," where I infer from I one of I 2 mutually opposed judgments to the other.
3. Per conversionemjudicii," where I convert the termini of the judgment, only the
relation, not the quality.
4. Per contrapositionemf where again the quantity is not altered, only the quality.
What was predicate in the first proposition becomes now subject, but the
quantity, the affirmative and the negative[,] remains. (MetathesisL.) {In every
affirmative judgment I can contrapose - one need only convert.}
Now we will go through the individualconsequentiae.
i. Perjudicia subalternata - what belongs to allbelongs to some, e.g., all
men are mortal, consequently some men are mortal.
i
* "Lemma - Lehnurteil."
' it is something foreign.
; "Episode."
* but.
' through equivalent judgments.
™ as to quantity.
" through opposed judgments.
" Through the conversion of judgments.
f Through contraposition.
501
770 2. All Oppositionen in logic have 3 distinct kinds. They are:
1. contradictorie opposita to one another - {contain everything required for opposition - }[;] or they contain less than is required for opposition, the judida
2. subcontmrie opposita {hence they can both be true} or
3. contrarie opposita {contain more than is required, hence can both be false.}
Now we proceed to their rules.
The rule of the first [kind]: No proposition is opposed to another
contradictorie except the universal affirmative to the particular negative. -
People have accepted certain symbols. Universal affirmatives are signified* with a, universal negatives with e, particulariter affirmatives i, o particular negatives. This is expressed thus:
Assent a, negat e, sed universaliter ambo -
Assent i, negat o, sedparticulariter ambo.r -
If one of 2 contradictory judgments is true, then the other is false, and
conversely.
We come
2. to judgments subcontrarie opposita.1 Particular judgments are opposed to one
another subcontrarie.
3. Judgments contrarie opposita are those where two universal judgments are
opposed to one another as a and e.
With universal judgments one says more than is needed for opposition.
For opposition, however, nothing more is required than that a and o, e and
i, are in opposition.
3. Conversio judicii consists in the inference of one judgment from
another through metathesis terminorum' {since one makes what previously
was subject the predicate}, but through preservation of the quality of the
judgment. Thejudicium conversum is given, the convertens must be deduced
from the consequentia immediata. Conversio simplex f is where the quantity
remains the same. The concept of the subject is considered as if it stands
under the predicate as locus geometricus." {Hence one cannot convert these
propositions, that would bring the latior under the angustior} Universal
771 affirmative judgments can actually be converted only per accidens, but
particular affirmatives <simpliciter>. All negative judgments may be converted simplidter — the opposition is always reciprocal. All universal affirmatives, etc. Contraposition through metathesis^.
{N.B. Tuesday the 17th. Kant took a vacation here of more than 4weeks.}
9 Reading "Allgemein bejahende werden . . . partikulär verneinende bezeichnet" for
"Allgemein bejahende . . . partikulär verneinende."
' A asserts, E negates, but in both cases universally / asserts, Onegates,but in both cases
particularly.
' Reading "opposita" for "oppositae."
' transposition ofterms.
" geometrical locus or place.
502
{MONDAY THE ZOTH AUGUST}
An inference of the understanding is the consequentia" of one judgment from
another, absquejudicio intermedia." An inference of reason is the cognition
of the necessity of a proposition through the subsumption of its condition
under a universal rule. This is called ajudicium intermedium.
{An inference of reason is the consequence of one inference of the
understanding from another through zjudicium intermedium. Inferences of
the understanding infer from the universal to the particular, inferences of
the power of judgment from the particular to the universal. [The power of
judgment] substitutes: atqui* this is a case of the universal rule. Its inferences are never strict - only an attempt in subsidiumy - thus analogyand
induction.}
Everything extended is divisible, consequently bodies are divisible, is
not a consequential immediata. In the case of a universal inference of reason
it is necesary that it be brought under a universal rule, and secondly that
one subsume the condition under the universal rule. E.g. Everything
extended is divisible, atqui all bodies are <extended>, ergoL all bodies are
divisible. Every inference of reason consists of 3 propositions:
1. the universal rule, i.e., the major proposition, majorpropositio,
2. the condition of the subsumption of a certain proposition under a universal
proposition, the minorL,
3. the proposition that is to be understood through the subsumption under a
universal rule, the condusio.
Analogy and induction are inferences of the power of judgment. In
inferences one can never infer <surely> from the particular to the universal. An inference of <induction> is when I infer from some things that
belong to a certain species to all the things of the species, that it belongs to
all the others. {To know how one ought to seek variety, how one reflects, 772
this one cannot teach. -}
According to the inference by analogy, if 2 things agree under as many
I determinations I as I have become acquainted with, then I infer that they
agree f also I in I the other I determinations I. I infer, then, from some
determinations, which I cognize, that the others belong to the thing too.
This is an inference of a provisional judgment. One reserves the right to
change it. {An inference according to analogy, that animals have souls -
B u t . . . t why? If wasps have drunk from the forbidden honey and now
wish to sting, then they fall, but they have ... t Faculty of desire. This
holds for plants, too, the fly-trap. They seek air and sun and water.f}
" Reading "Konsequenz" for "Folge."
" without an intermediatejudgment.
' but.
3 in support.
503
No logician has yet developed analogy and induction properly. This
field still lies open. A judgment which settles what is true or false is called
determinative . . . t
There are three kinds of inferences of reason, categorical, hypothetical,
and disjunctive.In the first there are only 3 termini. The ground of this lies
in the fact that in all inferences of reason there must lie at the basis a rule,
under which one subsumes. The 3rd isthe application - conclusio. Inevery
inference of reason we have matter and form. The first consists of the
premises {the premises are called the matter of the inference of reason},
the latter of the consequentia. Logic does not have to concern itself at all
with falsehood quoad materiam.z If one has concluded correctly, even from
false premises, then the conclusion is nonetheless correct. No rational
being is infallible. Man is a rational being, therefore no man is infallible.
The conclusion is correct, the premises false. What pertains to logic isonly
the argumentation and the error aut veritas ratiodnii quoad formam."
The major propositio is always an assertoric proposition. {The major
propositio contains the rule, the minorL the subsumption, the conclusio the
consequence. An inference of reason [is] the consciousness of the necessity of a proposition through subsumption under a universal rule. -}
Each of these inferences of reason has its special principle. Categorical
inferences of reason infer according to the dictum de omni et nullo. Hypothetical inferences of reason according to the rule a ratione ad rationatum
valet consequentiak or a negatione rationati ad negationem rationis valet consequentia' <posita ratione ponitur rationatumd>.
773 The dictum de omni et nullo is a consequence of the principium contradictionis {the principle of contradiction is the principle of judgments, not of
inferences of reason}. It says:
Quicquid valet de genere aut specie,' valet etiam de omnibus sub genere aut
specie — quicquid non valet de genere aut specie, non valet etiam de omnibus sub
isto genere aut ista specie contentis/
I can infer thus, for the concept of the whole contains the marks of the
individual. Kant expresses this:
Nota notae est nota rei ipsiusg <the universal principle of all affirmative
z
as to matter.
" error or truth of the inference as to form.
* from the ground to the grounded the consequentia holds.
' from the negation of the grounded to the negation of the ground, the consequentia holds
(reading "a negatione rationati ad negationem rationis valet consequentia" for "a negatione
rationati").
' inpositing theground one posits thegrounded.
' Reading "de genere autspecie" for"de genere."
f Whatever holds of the genus or species holds also of all those things under the genus or
species - whatever does not hold of the genus or species also does not hold of all the things
contained under that genus or that species.
g A mark of a mark is a mark of the thing itself.
504
inferences> - Repugnans notae repugnat rei ipsih <the principle of all negative inferences>.
{E.g., All bodies are alterable. I seek the nota intermedia divisible, a more
proximate mark of all bodies. Alterable is a mark of divisible, divisible a
mark of bodies, hence alterable is a mark of bodies.
divisible
bodies - alterable
divisible - alterable
bodies - divisible
- - alterable
according to the principle of all affirmative inferences.34
Inferences of reason consist, then, in the fact that we compare a nota
notae with the nota rei ipsius per notam intermedium.'}
In the case of disjunctive propositions, the membra disjunctions, no
matter how many they are, must <be> considered as one term According to the principium exclusi medii inter duo contradiaoria'>, for with contradictory judgments there can only be 2 propositions, a and non a.
We come to the doctrine
Of categorical inferences of reason
They deal merely with categorical propositions. - The major terminus is
the predicate, the mmorL the subject, and Iin addition I [there is] the
medius. There can only be 4 conclusions. Medius terminus estk in majori
<propositione loco> subjecti and in minori <loco> praedicati.1 Every conclusio
consists of a subject and a predicate. We will now exhibit the 4 different
syllogistic figures.
I
All M. err
M.P.
Learned men are M.
S.M.
Learned men can err
S.P.
II
Bodies'" are divisible
P.M.
The soul is not divisible
S.M.
The soul is not corporeal
S.P.
Ill
M.P.
M.S.
S.P.
IV
P.M.
M.S.
S.P.
* What conflicts with a mark conflicts with the thing itself.
1 [we compare a] mark of a mark [with the] mark of the thing itself through an intermediate mark.
; principle oftheexcluded middle between twocontradictories.
* Reading "est" for "ist."
' In the major <proposition> the middle term is <in the place> of the subject [and] in
the minor it is <in the place> of the predicate.
™ Reading "Körper" for "Korper."
774
505
{One has to represent this to oneself as a chain of three terms. -
- Bodies aredivisible.
The soul is not divisible.
corporeal.
For the majorL is the rule. The minorL is always affirmative. For I say:
atqui this is contained under the rule.}
In the 2nd figure one always finds a negative conclusion. For here one
never infers immediately, but rather one must put in a condusio immediate.
The major propositio must always <in all categorical inferences of reason> be universal.
In the 3rd figure we can only have a particular conclusion.
The 4th figure never has a universal affirmative or universal negative
conclusion. Inference in the 2nd, 3rd, or 4th figure must always be reduced in thought to the first.
{Only inferences according to the first figure are categorical. The others are all ratiocinia impum. —With the categorical inference of reason,
namely, the predicate of the condusio must be related to the medius terminus. Ratiocinia hybrida, where besides the premises and the condusio [one
needs] also a consequentia immediata. —}
Now we must go through the universal rules of inferences of reason.
775 In any inference of reason there can only be 3 termini. If a terminus^ is
taken in two meanings, then the inference in fact has 4 termini. Thus the
expression in the schools: The inference goes on 4 feet. The terminus
medius must lie in the premises.
Now come a few errors that are easily committed:
1. Ex puris negatives <praemissis> nil sequitur" {for the minor propositio must be
affirmative,}
2. Ex puris particularibus nil sequitur" {[this] follows from the concept of an inference of reason. At least the majorL must be universalis}.
3. Condusio sequitur partem debilioremf which is as much as to say that one of the
premises is called the pars debilior if it is negative or particular, then the
condusio is also either particular or negative. {- Only the minorL can be
particular. -}
Negation is opposition, contradiction.
We come now to the special rules for inferences of reason of the first
figure. They are called
Major sit universalis, minor affirmansq —this fits all categorical inferences. Now further minorsit affirmans holds for all as well. The minorpro-
" From purely negative <premises> nothing follows.
° From purely particular [premises] nothing follows.
p The conclusion follows the weaker part.
* The major should be universal, the minor affirmative.
506
positio ought, indeed, to express that the condition belongs to this or to that.
All inferences in the remaining figures are not ratiociniapura, but hybrida —
i.e., ones that do not actually [consist] of 3 propositions, but where a 4th is
mixed in per consequentiam immediatam. {Another term in the ratiocinium is
called the 4th foot.} It is only an artificial trick to produce a correct inference through transposition of the medius terminus. {Transposition, metathesis terminorum, is of two sorts, per contrapositionem, per conversionem. The
conclusio in the 3 remainingfiguresis never universalaffirmative - in accordance with the first one has all 4 kinds (univ. <and> part.[,] affirmative and
negative). This shows that the other ones walk on stilts.}
In the 2nd figure, Major <sit> universalis, conclusio negativa.'
In the third figure, MinorL <because it is the subsumption> affirmans,
conclusio particularism {The alteration occurs in the minor propositio. If this
is universal <or particular> affirmative before [the alteration], as always,
then it can only <be> converted per acddens - if [the minorL] had been
particular affirmative, then: conclusio sequiturpartem debiliorem,' hence it is
particular too.}
In the 4th figure: Conclusio vel negativa velparticularism
Reusch's logic.35 The conclusion of the 2nd figure is negative, because
the syllogism cannot be made into the first figure. In the 3rd figure a
metathesis terminorum must be performed on the minorpropositio. A universal affirmative proposition can only be converted per acddens. The inference in the first figure is the only pure one. (Ars non habet osorem nisi
ignorantem.")
The modus of a proposition is the quality and quantity. In the
figure one can infer in Barbara {ad p. i io}.36 One writes thus:
Cel — ar — ent. In the syllables where there is an s I must convert the proposition simpliciter, p per acddens, where there is an
m, there must be conversion, where there is a c, there must be
contraposition.
The modi come altogether to 64 various kinds from the 4
vowels a —e — i —o.
For each there are 16 different inferences. But 28 are left
out according to the rule: Ex puns negativis nihil sequitur." 18
are left out according to the rule: Conclusio sequitur debiliorem.x
8 are excluded according to the rule that a negative conclusion
' The major <should be> universal, the conclusion negative.
* The minor. . . . [should be] affirmative, the conclusion particular.
' The conclusion follows the weaker part.
" The conclusion is either negative or particular.
1 Art has no enemy but ignorance.
* From purely negative [premises] nothing follows
* The conclusion follows the weaker part.
first
a a e"
a a i
a a o
a e a
a i a
a o a
e a o
e i o
e o o
etc.
776
507
cannot follow from merely affirmative premises. There remain no more
than 10 modi, of which only 8 modi are utiles. -
The hypothetical inference of reason is one where the major propositio is a
conditioned proposition.Modusponens infers from the ground to the consequence. Modus tollens from the consequence to the ground. It cannot
happen that I infer a consequente sublato ad antecedentem.3
The dilemma is a hypothetical <judgment> whose consequence is a
disjunctive judgment. {E.g., if this world is not the best, then either God
was acquainted with none better, or he was unable or unwilling to create a
better one.}
Now a formal inference of reason is an enunciation, where something is
expressed explicite. Among the ratiocinia cryptica is included the enthymeme. {E.g., all animals are mortal, consequently all men are too. The
medius terminus is lacking.}
An inference of reason is cryptic per tmnsmissionem praemissarum* or per
omissionem praemissarum."
A Syllogismus contractus is when I infer per medium terminum.b
All inferences of reason ought to give necessity in their conclusion. If 2
things that stand under the same genus agree in all respects with which I
777 am acquainted, then this is so in the case of the others too. I infer from the
identity of some properties to the identity of all. An inference can never
produce a cognition from empirical propositions. {The inferences by induction and analogy are only crutches for human reason.} Only from
universal premises can we infer. But no proposition of experience gives us
Universität' simpliciter, but only secundum quid,d as far as we are acquainted.
The inference, Iwhen 11 infer from some predicates of the things to all
the remaining ones, that is an inference by analogy. E.g., Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus are dark planets. Now I infer
through induction that the remaining planets, which perhaps can still be
discovered, might also be dark. The inference by induction is also called
ob paritatem rationis.!
Exempla illustrant, nonprobant/There is no inference by example/then.
An inference of reason that is false in <matter> is called a fallacy, and
if it is false in <forma> —a paralogism. A sophisma is an inference that is
' from the consequence to the antecedent bydenial (Ak, "antecedentem schließe"; MS
and Ko, "antecedentem schließe."
z by passing over premises.
" by omission of premises.
* through the middle term.
' thewhole.
' with qualification.
' because oftheequality oftheground.
{ Examples illustrate, they do not prove.
* "Exempelschluß."
508
false in forma. {The word sophist did not always have the bad meaning,
specious reasoner.h}
It is believed of many false inferences that they are so informa, but quite
often they are so in materia. The ancient Megaric school, founded by
Euclides the Megaric (not the geometer), occupied itself with such inferences, turned many people around in this way.'
Achilles, Cretensis, Acervus. {Cf. Daries, Logics}
{If you say you lie, and in sayingthis you speak the truth, then you speak
the truth by lying - [this] is false in materia, in that you saythat youlie. -
Epimenides says: All Cretans are liars. Ipse vero est cretensis - ergo ipse est
mendax,' hence his claim would be a lie.}
One adds more and more[;] how many grains make a heap? With
gradual increase there is no transition to another genus. {For concepts of
comparative quantity there is no specific difference at a determinate place.
This serves principally in morals to warn against defects of the mediusk
<of mediocrity>. In the case of things that are specifically different, let us
be careful to make a distinction according to degree.}
Cornutus.1 Quicquid non amisisti, habes. Cornua non amisisti. Ergo habes."1
Calvus." How many hairs [must be] removed before a head is bald? - I
cannot define anything through more or less. —
The sophisma heterozeteseos,0 when it concerns a disputed question, is 778
called a sophisma ignorationis elenchi. - E.g., the proof of the immortality of
the soul - one would prove a future life.38
Ratiocinia can also be composita, insofar as they are subordinate to one
another.
Ratiocinatio episyllogisticap occurs when the conclusion of a syllogism is
the premise of a given one. In all academic disputations one infers per
prosyllogismos.
{Sorites, a series of inferences of reason according to episyllogistic
order.} There are still some explanations to be added:
A saltus in probando,q when one connects a ground with a remote consequence without a mediating proposition. - {One can leap legitime, when
the mediating proposition is understood of itself. - }
"Vernunftler."
"wendete viele artig."
He himself is in fact a Cretan - therefore he himself is a liar.
middle.
The horned one.
Whatever you have not lost, you have. Youhave not lost horns. Therefore you have them.
The bald one.
sophism of misdirection.
Episyllogistic reasoning.
leap in proof.
509
Circulus inprobando,' when one introduces into the ground of proof that
which is supposed to be proved.
Petitio prindpii —to assume gratis^. —
One says of proofs that are erroneous that they say too much or too
little, the former is a vitium,1 the latter a defectus.' He who proves too much
proves nothing at all. Just as he.who says less than the truth does not lie,
but he who says more than the truth certainly lies.
{Topics, the science that shows how one ought to determine logical
places.} Topic is the art of bringing f one's concepts under certain principal concepts <fields>: generalia capita argumentorum aut genera in quibus
reperiuntur." A particular sentence is called a locus topicusv or, since that is
tautological, locus communis." Thus a canon is something like, You cannot
teach an old dog new tricks/ Locus grammaticus,y e.g., etymology[;] locus
logicus[,]z like the dictum de omni et nullo —Inference a toto ad paries" etc.
Locus metaphysicus, ethicus[,]b whether I derive something from utili or
honesto. Argumentum ab utili,' etc. Locus physicus —from the purposes of
nature. The name may well have come
~~ from the locus geometricus, i.e., when a
problem can be divided into infinitely
many kinds. {Parallels, the locus geomet-
— ricus of equal triangles on one base.}
It is impossible, however, for philosophy to make itself equal to mathematics in this.
779 In accordance with our division, we proceed to the last part of logic,
which can also be regarded as a brief appendix:
' Acircle in proof.
' error.
' defect.
" general headings for arguments, or genera in which they are found.
1 topical topic.
* common topic, or commonplace.
* "jung gewohnt, alt gethan."
3 A grammatical topic.
z
a logical topic.
" from the whole to the parts.
* A metaphysical topic, an ethical topic.
' Argument from usefulness.
510//. The doctrine of method
This is also called the practical part. There really is no practical logic,
however. For it is not an organon, only a canon. This appendix serves for
the critique of cognition.
The doctrine of method contains the precepts for the possibility of a
system of cognition of the understanding and of reason. It is, then, the
doctrine of methodus. {Methodus - the waya cognition can attain scientific
form.} Method is combination of thoughts. - We can think of it in two
ways, as methodus logica {not merely the way of teaching but the way of
thinking}[;] this could be called manner, it rests wholly on rules; methodus
aesthetica rests merely on taste and may not be brought to any rules.
The word methodus is not translated sufficiently by [the German word
for] method.d For there is a method as mode of thinking as well | as | of
teaching.
{Exposition
1. systematic
2. fragmentary
1. methodical
2. tumultuous.}
Now come the various methods.
The first division is into synthetic and analytic. The latter is where I go
from consequences to grounds, the former where I go from grounds to
consequences. {A division is unsystematic if one cannot see from it why
there could not be still more terms of the division.} In philosophizing one
can proceed synthetically or analytically. The mathematical method is a
synthetic method. It differs from all others in that it presents through
intuition. A way of thinking' is always something moral. But one could say
that a mode of thought-^ is the methodus. Method is
1. popular - this is for the common understanding - in concrete.
2. scholastic - belongs to the sciences - inabstracto.
To orient oneself, means to put oneself in a certain standpoint where one
can easily consider the things in concreto f.
d "Lehrart" (literally, "mode of teaching").
' "Denkungsart."
/ "Denkart."
511
780 Methodus syllogistica. Many have even made an effort to expound mathematics in this way. - {Basically, however, this is only a mere subtlety.}
The method of tables - a certain tree, which has many principal and
secondary branches.
A science is a cognition that [is] derived from certain principles and fits
together in a system.
The Socratic method - the Platonic. -
Methodus vel est acroamatica {where someone expounds alone, without
asking or answering} vel erotematica* {in question and answer}. The latter
is catechistic or dialogical. In the former the one who asks is always the
teacher, in the second the one who is asked. The acroamatic method is
also the Platonic.
Philosophical materials should never be expounded catechistically.
Catechism can be mechanical or judideuse {through association of representations —this cultivates the understanding}.
Can one expound religion catechistically? {It is thereby led astray into
prejudices.} Actually this is not the best method, that would be the dialogical. The common man cannot very well grasp a coherent exposition.
Historical cognitions canbe expounded catechistically. -
Socrates said: I am die midwife of someone else's thoughts. He derived everything from their concepts, which they were simply not able to
develop suitably. - {This kind of catechistic method is the only one that
may be applied in philosophical objects. It is basically erotematic catechism, although it is called dialogical. - Catechisms ought to be arranged thus - first, derive everything from reason and on this build
positive religion - for man as he nowis.}
One can diink tumultuously or methodically. The latter, when we wish
to produce a cognition, is called meditation. But before one thinks methodically, one must always diink tumultuously too, ramble around, seek
out everything that occurs to one.
1. [W]hat do I want? - {Many who wrote books did not know this at all, or only
obscurely. - }
2. [W]hat is important in this connection.
These 2 points indicate the man who isjudideuse. —
{Homonyma, expressions that mean many things, are proofs of the pov-
781 erty of a language.} Signification of cognition, speaking, writing[.] - But
what the author says about this does not belong to logic. - One must not
forge termini technid widiout need. Nonedieless, scholastic strictness does
sometimes require them. One does not understand a thing until one can
communicate it to others. Words with which one cannot combine any
distinct concept (e.g., entelechia) are called termini inanes.h A conceptus
g Method is either acroamatic ... or erotematic.
* empty terms.
512
acceptor, a deceptive concept, usually contains 2 concepts that in and of
themselves aredistinct - but together arenotunderstandable. {| Concepts |
which seem to mean something but in the end mean nothing, like apathy
and idiosyncrasy.} Moreover, a terminus familiaris {a commonly used
expression} - ones that occur in common life.
{Logomachy, conflict through misunderstanding of words, verbal conflict. Such a thing cannot last long. One would have discovered it long
since, as, e.g., the dispute between defenders of | freedom and defenders
of natural necessity.}
Quite often people believe they understand one another just when they
are furthest removed from each other.
Terminus ambiguus {ambiguous}, vagus, an expression about which one
never rightly finds out what is to be thought thereby - fortune - such a
thing can be determined. Proposition —judicium verbis prolatum' - no —
only assertoric <judgments are> propositions. {- A propositio is a judicium categoricum, hence a kind of judicium, and judicium is not synonymous with propositio}
A syllogism is a ratiocinium formale, not verbis prolatumJ One must of
course always express it with words, loudly or softly. {It is only a matter of
the expression of concepts <through> thought or words.}
{What logic is in regard to thought, style is in regard to the signification*
of thought. Logical perfection of style is scholastic perfection - opposed
to it is aesthetic perfection.}
Purity, elegance of style, is called purism when one exaggerates it.
Elegance.' Glittering words:"1 . . . .f, longimetry, half Greek, half Latin.
Not loquacity - ornatus" - (nosonority). A speech - sermo —oratio, if itis
festive. Eloquence" is suitable for all writings. Oratory/ arspersuadendi,q to
win approval for the present moment.
In the case of learned exposition - the abilityto descend and the ability
to ascend/ {Glibness, copia1 of words, eloquence - art of applying this
copia. Rhetoric, the skill of leading others with this art according to one's
purposes, of making the false seem true.}
Sermons must be universallyunderstandable. In them there must reign 782
a power to have an effect on every soul. They come together out of a
' a judgment set forth in words.
' a formal inference, [not] one merely expressed in words.
* "Bezeichnung."
' "Concinnität."
™ "Zwitterwörter."
" ornate, embellished.
' "Wohlredenheit."
p "Beredsamkeit."
* the art of persuasion.
' "Descendenz undCoascendenz."
' abundance.
513I M M A N U E L KANT
common end. A. Hermann Fmnckew says that sermons should be such that
if a man has heard only one of them, he finds perfect morals. The ability
to descend' and the ability to ascend" are a great gift, to distinguish, to
choose, what this and what every listener needs. It requires much genius,
to teach a little to someone who can learn little. In an auditorium^ as in the
writing of a book, one must be able to ascend, concern oneself with the
higher abilities, which will develop into something at some time in the
future.
We have two kinds of exposition
(i.) didactical and (2.) polemical. The first is instructive (dogmatic), the
second merely frees from errors.
We refute'' someone when we refute" his claim. <to answer and to
provide an answer - different. > It falls to him who says that the other is
wrong to prove it.
In every dispute we have thesis and antithesis —thesis <status> controversiae.x The determination of the question {this often involves great difficulties} is called the forma controversiae.y Here one often discovers a
logomachy - verbal dispute. But a logomachy does not usually ever last
long. -
Argumentations are divided into
1. argumentations XCCT' 6iXr|9Eiav,z based on objective grounds,
2. argumentations xat' dvOQcoitov," based on subjective ones {i.e., based on
assertions of the subject, as, e.g., in the gospel, that there are spirits, because
they believe in ghosts. - }
A bet is an agreement on punishment for him who fails. The argumentatio ad crumenamb is wholly fair. The argumentum a verecundia[;]c there
the monk Abelard said: Si omnes patres sie-ego non sic.d —Instance, a
particular proposition that contradicts a universal one. Retort, when one
proves conversely, namely, makes a consequence from my proposition that
affects theopponent. -
A consequentarius, one who, from the theoretical assertions of someone
else, draws consequences that bring danger. {A consequentarius is one who
draws from my propositions consequences that are disadvantageous to the
person of someone. -}
' "Condescendenz."
* "Coadescendenz."
* "refutieren."
* "widerlegen.'"
" the thesis <answer to the question brought> of the controversy.
* form of the controversy.
z
arguments based on truth.
" arguments based on the man.
* argument directed to the purse.
' argumentfrom modesty (i.e., an appeal to authority).
4
If all the fathers [say]so - I [say]not so.
514D O H N A - W U N D L A C K E N LOGIC
An apology is a defense against a consequentarian/ A formal disputation - there the acteurs are the respondent and the opponent. To make
things immediately comprehensible for the respondent, one speaks in 783
inferences. The rule contains principally this, that the conclusion of
one's argument will directly contradict the thesis of the respondent —per
prosyllogismos. The praeses/ as assistant to the respondent, seeks to even
out thedispute. -
That which makes one prudent is pragmatic. Passing judgment on the
effects based on their causes.
A compilatoris one who makes one book out of many. {It is much harder
to express oneself briefly and coherently, e.g. in a letter - manual - than
extensively.} An epitomator1 is one who makes a small thing out of a large
one. {He must be an expert, in order not to injure the spirit of the work in
his selection.} A plagiarius is a learned thief, who steals his thoughts from
another.
The author speaks lastly of the character of the learned man. A naturalist is one who acquires cognitions that do not constitute a system. Metaphysics and morals are the hobby horses of such people. {There can be
naturalists in allfields.-}
An autodidactos, one who has science without teachers {like Lambert«0},
who either has created everything by himself or at least has been his own
commentator in reading scientific books.
Actually there are no synonyms in any language. For when words were
invented one certainly wanted to signify with each of them a particular
concept, which one will always find on more exact investigation of the
word. E.g., steed <rider>, horse <genus>, nag, jade <work>, (hack,*
[the German word for] which comes from' caballus)[;] each brings with it a
particular concept.
While enumerating methods earlier we forgot the mathematical. This is
none other than the synthetic method, which proceeds from the first
grounds of a cognition and stops at the last consequences. The first thing
with this method, now, is definition, then axiom, theorem, problem, etc.
{Scholion, corollar. Wolff expounded philosophy in accordance with this
method, which cannot be done.}
Note. In conclusion, Kant added some more about meditation, methodical thinking. He said, namely, that it is principally a matter (as mentioned
above) of two things:
1. to know exactly what one really wants, and then
2. what is important for that. Then he brought up how much effort it
' "Konsequenzmacher."
f guardian (a formally prescribed role in the defense of a thesis).
* one who makes an epitome or abridgement.
* "Kobbel."
' Reading "das von caballus kömmt" for "davon kömmt caballus."
515
was for him, e.g., when he was occupied with the thought of writing the
784 Critique of Pure Reason, to know what he really wanted. In the end he
found that everything could be captured in die question, Are synthetic
propositions apriori possible? - Yes.But it depends on the fact that wecan
give them corresponding intuitions. If this cannot occur, however, then
they do not have this property. From this one sees how much easier
meditation is made by this method.
{This occurred in the repetitorium Saturday[;] the collegium was closed
on Friday. - }
End of Kant's Logic
Saturday, the . . . . st of September, 1792
516PART IV
Thejäsche logicImmanuel Kant's
Logic
A manualfor lectures
edited by Gottlob Benjamin JäschePreface
It is a year and a half now since Kant commissioned me to prepare his
Logic for publication, as he expounded it to his listeners in public lectures,
and to transmit it to the public in the form of a compendious manual. For
this purpose I received from him his own manuscript, which he had used
in his lectures, with the expression of special, honorable confidence in me,
that, being acquainted with the principles of his system in general, I would
easily enter into the course of his ideas, that I would not distort or falsify
his thoughts, but rather would present them with the required clarity and
distinctness and at the same time in the appropriate order. Now since, as I
thus accepted the commission and have sought to carry it out as well as I
was able, in conformity with the wish and the expectation of that praiseworthy wise man, my most honored teacher and friend, everything that concerns the exposition, the clothing and the execution, the presentation and
the ordering of the thoughts, is in part to be reckoned to my account, I am
naturally obliged to provide an account to the readers of this new Kantian
work. On this matter, then, a few closer explanations here.
Since the year 1765, Professor Kant has based his lectures on logic,
without interruption, on Meier's textbook as guiding thread (Georg Friedrich Meier's Excerpts from the Doctrine of Reason, Halle: Gebauer, 1752),
for reasons he explained in the program he published by wayof announcement of his lectures in the year 1765.' The copy of the mentioned compendium that he himself used in his lectures, like all the other textbooks he
used for the same purpose, is interleaved with paper; his general remarks
and elucidations, as well as the more special ones that relate in the first
instance to the text of the compendium in its individual sections, are
found partly on the interleaved paper, partly on the empty margin of the
textbook itself. And what has been written by hand here and there in
scattered remarks and elucidations, taken together, constitutes now the
storehouse of materials which Kant built up in his lectures here, which in
part he expanded from time to time through new ideas, and which in part
he again and again revised anew and improved in regard to various individual materials. Hence it contains at least the essentials of what the famous
commentator on Meier's textbook was accustomed to communicate to his
listeners concerning logic in lectures that were given in a free manner, and
that which he esteemed worthy of writing down.
521
Now as for what concerns the presentation and ordering of things in
this work, I believed that I would put forth the great man's ideas and
principles most fittingly if, with respect to the economy and the division of
the whole as such, I held myself to his express explanation, according to
which nothing more may be taken up in the proper treatment of logic, and
in particular in its Doärine of Elements, than the theory of the three essential principal functions of thought: concepts, judgments, and inferences.
Hence everything that deals with cognition in general and with its logical
perfections, and which in Meier's textbook precedes the doctrine of concepts and takes in almost half of the whole, must accordingly be reckoned
to the introduction. "Previously," Kant says right at the outset of the
eighth section,2 in which his author expounds the doctrine of concepts -
"Previously cognition in general was treated, as propaedeutic to logic, now
logic itself follows."
In consequence of this explicit pointer, I have placed everything that
occurs before the mentioned section in the Introduction, which for this
reason contains a much greater extension than it customarily includes in
other logic manuals. The consequence of this was then also that the Doctrine of Method, as the other principal part of the treatise, had to turn out that
much shorter, the more the materials that had already been treated in the
Introduction, as for example the doctrine of proofs, etc. - which, by the
way, are now rightly included in the sphere of the doctrine of method by our
modern logicians. It would have been a repetition as unnecessary as improper to give mention to this material yet again in its proper place, only in
order to make the incomplete complete and to put everything in its proper
place. I have done the latter with respect to the doctrine of definitions,
however, and of the logical division of concepts, which in Meier's compendium
belongs to the eighth section, namely, to the doctrine of elements of concepts, an order which even Kant left unaltered in his exposition.
It is surely obvious that the great reformer of philosophy and, as concerns
the economy and external form of logic, of this part of theoretical philosophy in particular, would have worked on logic according to his architectonic
plan, whose essential outlines are sketched in the Critique of Pure Reason, if
it had pleased him to do so, and if his occupation with a scientific grounding
of the whole system of philosophy proper - philosophy of the really true
and certain, which is an occupation immeasurably more important and
more difficult, and which in the first instance only he and he alone could
carry out with his originality - had permitted him to think of preparing a
logic himself. But this work he was quite able to leave to others, who, with
insight and with unbiased judgment, could use his architectonic ideas for a
truly purposeful and well-ordered arrangement and treatment of this science. This was to be expected from several thorough and unbiased thinkers
among our German philosophers. And in this expectation Kant and the
522
friends of his philosophy were not disappointed. Several recent textbooks
on logic are to be regarded, in respect of the economy and the disposition of
the whole, more or less as fruit of those Kantian ideas on logic. That this
science has really gained through this; that it has become, though not richer
or really more solid as to its content or in itself better grounded, yet more
purified, partly from all its foreign components, partly from so manyuseless
subtleties and merely dialectical tricks; that it has become more systematic
and yet at the same time, with allscientific strictness ofmethod, simpler - of
this everyone must be convinced, even by the most fleeting comparison of
older textbooks of logic with modern ones worked out in accordance with
Kantian principles, if only he has correct and clear concepts of the proper
character and the legitimate limits of logic. For however much many of the
older manuals on this science may stand out for scientific strictness of
method; for clarity, determinateness, and precision of explanations; and for
conciseness and evidence in proofs; still there is scarcely a one of them in
which the limits of the various spheres that belong to universal logic in its
broader extension - the merely propaedeutic, the dogmatic und technical, the
pure and the empirical - do not run into and through each other, so that the
one cannot be determinately distinguished from the other.
HerrJakob, in the Preface to the first edition of his logic,3 does observe:
"Wolff grasped the idea of a universal logic exceptionally well, and if this
great man had thought of expounding pure logic in complete separation,
he would certainly, by means of his systematic mind, have presented us
with a masterpiece, which would have made all further work of this kind
unnecessary." But he did not execute this idea, and none of his successors
developed it either, however great and well-grounded in general the merit
may be that the Wolffian school has attained concerning the properly
logical, theformal perfection in our philosophical cognition.
But irrespective of what was able to happen and had to happen in
regard to external form for the perfection of logic by the necessary separation of pure and merely formal propositions from empirical and real or
metaphysical ones, when it comes to passing judgment on and determining the inner content of this science as science, there is no doubt about
Kant's judgment on this point. He frequently explained, determinately
and expressly, that logic is to be regarded as a separate science, existing
for itself and grounded in itself, and hence that from its origin and first
development with Aristotle,right down to our times, it could not really gain
anything in scientific grounding. In conformity with this claim, Kant did
not think either about grounding the logical principles of identity and
contradiction on a higher principle, or about deducing the logical forms of
judgment. He recognized and treated the principle of contradiction as a
proposition that has its evidence in itself and requires no derivation from a
higher principle. He only restricted the use, the validity, of this principle
523
by banishing it from the sphere of metaphysics, where dogmatism sought
to make it valid, and restricting it to the merely logical use of reason, as
valid only for this use alone.
But now whether the logical principle of identity and of contradiction is
really incapable of or does not need any further deduction, in itself and
without qualification, that is of course a different question, which leads to
the highly significant question of whether there is in general an absolutely
first principle of all cognition and science, whether such a thing is possible
and can be found.
The doctrine of science'' believes that it has discovered such a principle in
the pure, absolute I, and hence that it has grounded all philosophical
knowledge perfectly, not merely as to form but also as to content. And
having presupposed the possibility and the apodeictic validity of this absolutely one and unconditioned principle, it then proceeds completely consistently when it does not allow the logical principles of identity and of
contradiction, thepropositions^ = A and-A = -A,tohold unconditionally, but instead declares them to be subaltern principles, which can and
must be established and determined only through it and its highest proposition: / am. (See the Foundation of the Doctrine of Science, p. ißf.) In an
equally consistent way Schellingf in his system of transcendental idealism,
declares himself against the presupposition of logical principles as unconditioned, i.e., as not derivable from any higher principle, since logic can arise
in general only through abstraction from determinate propositions and,
insofar as it arises in a scientific way, only through abstraction from the
highest principles of knowledge, and since it consequently presupposes
these highest principles of knowledge and with them the doctrine of
science itself. Since, however, from the other side, these highest principles of knowledge, considered as principles, just as necessarily presuppose
logical form, there arises here that circle which cannot be broken by
science, but which can at least be explained, explained by recognition of a
principle of philosophy that is first both as to form and as to content
(formally and materially), in which these two, form and content, reciprocally condition and ground one another. In this principle is supposed to lie
the point in which the subjective and the objective, identical knowledge
and synthetic knowledge, are one and the same.
Given the presupposition of such a dignity, which must undoubtedly
belong to such a principle, logic would accordingly have to be subordinated,
like every other science, to the doctrine of science and its principles.
But whatever the situation may be here, this much is settled: In the
inner part of its sphere, as concerns the essential, logic remains in every
case unaltered; and the transcendental question as to whether logical
propositions are still capable of and require a derivation from a higher,
absolute principle has as little influence on logic and on the validity and
evidence of its laws as the transcendental problem, How are synthetic
524
judgments a priori possible in mathematics? does on pure mathematics in
regard to its scientific content. Like the mathematician as mathematician,
the logician as logician, within the sphere of his science, can also continue
confidently and certainly to explain and to prove, without permitting himself to worry about the transcendental question, which lies outside his
sphere, as to horn pure mathematics orpure logic ispossible as a science.
Given this universal recognition of the correctness of universal logic,
the battle between the skeptics and the dogmatists concerning the ultimate grounds of philosophical knowledge has never been conducted in
the domain of logic, whose rules were recognized as valid by every rational
skeptic as well as by the dogmatist, but rather has always been conducted
in the sphere of metaphysics. And how could it be otherwise? The highest
task of philosophy proper concerns not subjectivebut objective, not identical but synthetic, knowledge. In this, logic as such remains completely on
the sidelines; it could not occur either to critique or to the doctrine of
science —nor will it be able to occur at all to a philosophy that knows how
to distinguish determinately the transcendental standpoint from the
merely logical - to seek die ultimate grounds of real philosophical knowledge inside the sphere of mere logic, and to wish to cull a real object from a
proposition of logic, considered merely as such.
He who has grasped die enormous difference between logic proper
(universal logic), as a merely formal science, the science of mere diought
as diought, and transcendental philosophy, this sole material or real pure
science of reason, the science of knowledge proper, and who never again
fails to heed tiiis difference, will thus easily be able to pass judgment on
the question of what is to be said concerning die recent attempt lately
undertaken by Herr Bardili (in his Outlineof Primary Logic*1) to make out a
prius" for logic itself, in die expectation of finding on the path of this
investigation "a real object, eidier posited by it (mere logic) or nodiing can
be posited at all; the key to die essence of nature, either given by it, or no
logic and no philosophy is possible." In trudi, however, one cannot see in
what way Herr Bardili could discover a real object based on die prius of
logic that he advances, the principle of the absolute possibility of thought,
according to which we can repeat one as one and the same in the many (not
die manifold) infinitely many times. This prius of logic, supposedly newly
discovered, is in fact obviously nothing more and nothing less dian die
old, long recognized principle of identity, established within the sphere of
logic and placed at the head of this science: What I think, I think; and it is
only this and nothing else dial I can think repeated to infinity. —Who, after
all, in the case of the well understood logical principle of identity/ will
diink of a manifold and not of a mere many, which of course arises and can
" prior (i.e., claim to priority).
* "Satze der Identität."
525
arise through nothing other than the mere repetition of one and the same
thought, the mere repeated positing of an A = A = A, and so on to
infinity. It would be difficult, then, on the path that Herr Bardili has taken,
and by the heuristic method that he has used, to find what philosophical
reason seeks: the beginning and ending point, from which it may set out in
its investigations and to which it may again return. The principal and most
significan: objections that Herr Bardili has lodged against Kant and his
method of philosophizing could not so much touch Kant the logician, then,
but rather Kant the transcendental philosopher and metaphysician. Here,
10 then, we can let them be deferred entirely to their proper place.
Finally, I wish to mention here that as soon as leisure permits I will
work up the Kantian Metaphysics in the same manner and publish it, for
which I already have the manuscript in hand. Königsberg, the 2oth of
September, 1800.
Gottlob Benjamin Jäsche
Doctor and Private Docent at the University in Königsberg,
Member of the Learned Society of Frankfurt on the Oder.
526Introduction
i.
Concept of logic
Everything in nature, both in the lifeless and in the living world, takes
place according to rules, although we are not always acquainted with these
rules. - Water falls according to laws of gravity, and with animals locomotion also takes place according to rules. The fish in water, the bird in the
air, move according to rules. The whole of nature in general is really
nothing but a connection of appearances according to rules; and there is
no absence of rules anywhere. If we believe we have found such a thing, then
in this case we can only say that we are not acquainted with the rules.
The exercise of our powers also takes place according to certain rules
that we follow, unconscious of them at first, until we gradually arrive at
cognition of them through experiments and lengthy use of our powers,
indeed, until we finally become so familiar with them that it costs us much
effort to think them in abstracto. Thus universal grammar is the form of a
language in general, for example. One speaks even without being acquainted with grammar, however; and he who speaks without being acquainted with it does actually have a grammar and speaks according to
rules, but ones of which he is not himself conscious.
Like all our powers, the understanding in particular is bound in its
actions to rules, which we can investigate. Indeed, the understanding is
to be regarded in general as the source and the faculty for thinking rules
in general. For as sensibility is the faculty of intuitions, so the understanding is the faculty for thinking, i.e., for bringing the representations
of the senses under rules. Hence it is desirous of seeking for rules and is
satisfied when it has found them. Since the understanding is the source 12
of rules, the question is thus, according to what rules does it itself
proceed?
For there can be no doubt at all: we cannot think, we cannot use our
understanding, except according to certain rules. But now we can in turn
think these rules for themselves, i.e., we can think them apart from their
application or in abstracto. Now what are these rules?
527
All rules according to which the understanding operates are either necessary or contingent. The former are those without which no use of the
understanding would be possible at all, the latter those without which a
certain determinate use of the understandingwould not occur. The contingent rules, which depend upon a determinate object of cognition, are as
manifold" as these objects themselves. Thus there is, for example, a use of
the understanding in mathematics, in metaphysics, morals, etc. The rules
of this particular, determinate use of the understanding in the sciences
mentioned are contingent, because it is contingent whether I think of this
or that object, to which these particular rules relate.
If now we put aside all cognition that we have to borrow from objects and
merely reflect on the use just of the understanding, we discover those of
its rules which are necessary without qualification, for every purpose and
without regard to any particular objects of thought, because without them
we would not think at all. Thus we can have insight into these rules a
priori, i.e., independent of all experience, because they contain merely the
conditions for the use of the understanding in general, without distinction
among its objects, be that use pure or empirical. And from this it follows at
the same time that the universal and necessary rules of thought in general
can concern merely itsform and not in any way its matter. Accordingly, the
science that contains these universal and necessary rules is merely a
science of the form of our cognition through the understanding, or of
thought. And thus we can form for ourselves an idea of the possibility of
such a science, just as we can of a universal grammar, which contains
13 nothing more than the mere form of language in general, without words,
which belong to the matter of language.
Now this science of the necessary laws of the understanding and of
reason in general, or what is one and the same, of the mere form of
thought as such, we call logic.
As a science that deals with all thought in general, without regard to
objects as the matter of thought, logic
1. is to be regarded as foundation for all the other sciences and as the
propaedeutic to all use of the understanding. Just because it does abstract
wholly from all objects, however, it also
2. cannot be an organon of the sciences.
By an organon we understand, namely, a directive as to how a certain
cognition is to be brought about. This requires, however, that I already be
acquainted with the object of the cognition that is to be produced according to certain rules. An organon of the sciences is thus not mere logic,
° "vielfältig."
528
because an organon presupposes exact acquaintance with the sciences,
their objects and sources. Thus mathematics, for example, as a science
that contains the ground for the extension of our cognition in regard to a
certain use of reason, is an excellent organon. Logic, on the other hand, as
universal propaedeutic to all use of the understanding and of reason in
general, may not go into the sciences and anticipate their matter. It is only
a universal an of reason (canonica Epicuri) for making cognitions in general
conform to the form of die understanding in general, and hence is only to
this extent to be called an organon, which serves of course merely for
passing judgment and for correcting our cognition, but not for expanding it.
3. As a science of the necessary laws of thought, without which no use
of the understanding or of reason takes place at all, laws which consequently are conditions under which the understanding can and ought to
agree with itself alone - the necessary laws and conditions of its correct
use —logic is, however, a canon. And as a canon of the understanding and
of reason it may not borrow any principles either from any science or from
any experience; it must contain nothing but laws apriori, which are neces- 14
sary and have to do with the understanding in general.
Some logicians, to be sure, do presuppose psychological principles in
logic. But to bring such principles into logic is just as absurd as to derive
morals from life. If we were to take principles from psychology, i.e., from
observations concerning our understanding, we would merely see how
thinking does take place and how it is under various subjective obstacles
and conditions; this would lead dien to cognition of merely contingent laws.
In logic, however, die question is not about contingent but about necessary
rules; not how we do think, but how we ought to think. The rules of logic
must thus be derived not from the contingent but from the necessary use of
die understanding, which one finds in oneself apart from allpsychology.
In logic we do not want to know how die understanding is and does think
and how it has previously proceeded in diought, but radier how it ought to
proceed in diought. Logic is to teach us die correct use of die understanding, i.e., dial in which it agrees with itself.
From die given explanation of logic, die remaining essential properties of
this science may now also be derived, namely, that it
4. is a science of reason not only as to its mere form but as to its matter^
since its rules are not derived from experience, and since at the same time
it has reason as its object. Logic is thus a self-cognition of the understanding and of reason, not as to their faculties in regard to objects, however,
but merely as to form. In logic I will not ask what the understanding
cognizes and how much it can cognize or howfar its cognition goes. For
diat would be self-cognition in regard to its material use and tiius belongs
529
to metaphysics. In logic the question is only, How will the understanding
cognize itself?
Finally, as a science that is rational as to matter and to form, logic is also
5. a doctrine or a demonstrated theory. For since it is occupied, not with
the common and as such merely empirical use of the understanding and
15 of reason, but rather merely with the universal and necessary laws of
thought in general, it rests on principles a priori, from which all its rules
can be derived and proved, as ones with which all cognition of reason has
to be in conformity.
By virtue of the fact that logic is to be taken as a science a priori, or as
a doctrine for a canon of the use of the understanding and of reason, it
is essentially distinct from aesthetics, which as mere critique of taste has no
canon (law) but only a norm (model or standard for passing judgment),
which consists in universal agreement. Aesthetics, that is, contains the
rules for the agreement of cognition with the laws of sensibility; logic, on
the other hand, contains the rules for the agreement of cognition with
the laws of the understanding and of reason. The former has only
empirical principles and thus can never be science or doctrine, provided
that one understands by doctrine a dogmatic instruction from principles
a priori, in which one has insight into everything through the understanding without instruction from other quarters attained from experience,
and which gives us rules, by following which we procure the required
perfection.
Some, especially orators and poets, have tried to engage in reasoning*
concerning taste, but they have never been able to hand down a decisive
judgment concerning it. The philosopher Baumgarten in Frankfurt had a
plan for an aesthetic as a science.8 But Home,1* more correctly, called
aesthetics critique, since it yields no rules apriori that determine judgment
sufficiently, as logic does, but instead derives its rules a posteriori, and
since it only makes more universal, through comparison, the empirical
laws according to which we cognize the more perfect (beautiful) and the
more imperfect.
Logic is thus more than mere critique; it is a canon that subsequently
serves for critique, i.e., as the principle for passing judgment on all use of
the understanding in general, although only on its correctness in regard to
mere form, since it is not an organon, any more than universal grammar
is.
Now as propaedeutic to all use of the understanding in general, universal logic is distinct also on another side from transcendental logic, in which
the object itself is represented as an object of the mere understanding;
universal logic, on the contrary, deals with all objects in general.
16 If we now join together all the essential marks that belong to a complete
' "vernünfteln."
530
determination of the concept of logic, then we shall have to put forth the
following concept of it:
Logic is a science of reason, not as to mere form but also as to matter; a
science a priori of the necessary laws of thought, not in regard to particular
objects, however, but to all objects in general; —hence a science of the correct use
of the understanding and of reason in general, not subjectively, however, i.e.,
not according to empirical (psychological) principles for how the understanding
does think, but objectively, i.e., according to principles a priori for how it ought
to think.
II.
Principal divisions of logic - Exposition — Use of this science — Sketch
of its history
Logic is divided
i. into analytic and dialectic.
Analytic discovers through analysis all the actions of reason that we
perform in thinking. It is thus an analytic of the form of the understanding
and of reason and is rightly called the logic of truth, because it contains
the necessary rules of all (formal) truth, apart from which our cognition is
untrue in itself, regardless of its objects. Thus it is also nothing more than
a canon for adjudication (of the formal correctness of our cognition).
If one were to use this merely theoretical and universal doctrine as a
practical art, i.e., as an organon, then it would become dialectic. A logic of
illusion (ars sophistica, disputatoria'), which arises out of a mere misuse of
analytic, insofar as the illusion of a true cognition, the marks of which
have to be derived from agreement with objects and thus from content, is
fabricated according to mere logical form.
In earlier times dialectic was studied with great industry. This art expounded false principles under the illusion of truth and then sought, in
conformity with these, to maintain things in accordance with illusion.
Among the Greeks the dialecticians were the lawyers'' and orators, who
were able to lead the people wherever they wanted, because the people 17
allow themselves to be misled by illusion. At that time dialectic was thus
the art of illusion. For a long time, too, it was expounded in logic under
the name of the an of disputation, and as long as it was, all of logic and
philosophy were the cultivation of certain garrulous souls for fabricating
any illusion. Nothing can be less worthy of a philosopher, however, than
the cultivation of such an art. In this sense it must be done away with,
' a sophistic art, an art ofdisputation.
' "Sachwalter."
531
then, and instead of this a critique of this illusion must be introduced into
logic.
We would have two parts of logic, accordingly: analytic, which would
expound the formal criteria of truth, and dialectic, which would contain the
marks and rules in accordance with which we could recognize that something does not agree with the formal criteria of truth, although it seems to
agree with them. Dialectic in this sense would thus have its good use as
cathartic of the understanding.
It is customary to divide logic further into
2. natural or popular logic and artificial or scientific logic (logica naturalis, log.
scholastica s. artificialis).
But this division is inadmissible. For natural logic, or logic of common
reason (sensus communis), is not really logic but an anthropological science
that has only empirical principles, in that it deals with the rules of the
natural use of the understanding and of reason, which are cognized only
in concrete, hence without consciousness of them in abstracto. - Only artificial or scientific logic deserves this name, then, as a science of the necessary and universal rules of thought, which can and must be cognized a
priori, independently of the natural use of the understanding and of reason in concreto, although these rules can first be found only through observation of that natural use.
3. Another division of logic is that into theoretical and praaical logic. But this
division is also incorrect.
Universal logic, which as a mere canon abstracts from all objects, cannot have a practical part. This would be a contmdictio in adjecto, because a
practical logic presupposes acquaintance with a certain kind of object, to
18 which it is applied. Thus we can call every science a practical logic; for in
each we must have a form of thought. Universal logic, considered as
practical, can thus be nothing more than a technique of learnedness in
general, an organon of scholastic method.
In consequence of this division logic would thus have a dogmatic and a
technical part. The first would be called the doctrine of elements, the second
the doctrine of method. The practical or technical part of logic would be a
logical art in regard to order and to logical terms of art and logical
distinctions, to make it easier for the understanding to act.
In both parts, both the technical and the dogmatic, it would be
impermissible to give the least consideration either to the objects or to the
subject of thought. In this latter relation logic could be divided
4. into pure and applied logic.
In pure logic we separate the understanding from the other powers of
the mind and consider what it does by itself alone. Applied logic considers
532
the understanding insofar as it is mixed with the other powers of the mind,
which influence its actions and misdirect it, so that it does not proceed in
accordance with the laws which it quite well sees to be correct. Applied
logic really ought not to be called logic. It is a psychology in which we
consider how things customarily go on in our thought, not how they ought
to go on. In the end it admittedly says what one ought to do in order to
make correct use of the understanding under various subjective obstacles
and restrictions; and we can also learn from it what furthers the correct
use of the understanding, the means of aiding it, or the cures for logical
mistakes and errors. But propaedeutic it simply is not. For psychology,
from which everything in applied logic must be taken, is a part of the
philosophical sciences, to which logic ought to be the propaedeutic.
It is said, to be sure, that technique, or the way of building a science,
ought to be expounded in applied logic. But that is futile, indeed, even
harmful. One then begins to build before one has materials, and one gives
form, but content is lacking. Technique must be expounded within each
science.
Finally, as for what concerns
5. the division of logic into the logic of the common and that of the speculative 19
understanding, we note that this science simply cannot be thus divided.
It cannot be a science of the speculative understanding. For as a logic of
speculative cognition or of the speculative use of reason it would be an
organon for other sciences and not a mere propaedeutic, which ought to
deal with all possible use of the understanding and of reason.
Just as little can logic be a product of the common understanding. The
common understanding is the faculty by which we have insight into the
rules of cognition in concreto. Logic, however, ought to be a science of the
rules of thought in abstraäo.
Nonetheless we can accept the universal human understanding as object of logic, and to this extent it will abstract from the particular rules of
speculative reason and thus be distinct from the logic of the speculative
understanding.
As for what concerns the exposition of logic, it can be either scholastic or
popular.
It is scholastic insofar as it is adequate to the curiosity, the capabilities,
and the culture of those who want to treat the cognition of logical rules as
a science. Popular, however, if it condescends to the capabilities and needs
of those who do not study logic as science but only want to use it to
enlighten their understanding. - In the scholastic exposition the rules
must be presented in their universality or in abstracto; in the popular, on the
other hand, in theparticular or in concreto. The scholastic exposition is the
533I M M A N U E L KANT
foundation for the popular, for the only one who can expound something
in a popular way is one who could also expound it more thoroughly.
Here we distinguish exposition from method, by the way. By method is to
be understood, namely, the way to cognize completely a certain object, to
whose cognition the method is to be applied. It has to be derived from the
nature of the science itself and, as an order of thought that is determined
thereby and is necessary, it cannot be altered. Exposition means only the
20 manner of communicating one's thoughts in order to make a doctrine
understandable.
From what we have previously said concerning the nature' and the end of
logic, the worth of this science and the use of its study can be evaluated in
accordance with a correct and determinate standard.
Logic is thus not a universal art of discovery, to be sure, and not an
organon of truth - not an algebra, with whose help hidden truths can be
discovered.
It is useful and indispensable as a critique of cognition, however, or for
passing judgment on common as well as on speculative reason, not in
order to teach it, but only to make it correct and in agreement with itself.
For the logical principle of truth is agreement of the understanding with
its own universal laws.
As for what concerns the history of logic, finally, we want to cite only the
following:
Contemporary logic derives from Aristotle's Analytic. This philosopher
can be regarded as the father of logic. He expounded it as organon and
divided it into analytic and dialectic. His manner of teaching is very scholastic and has to do with the development of the most universal concepts,
which lie at the basis of logic, but one has no use for it because almost
everything amounts to mere subtleties, except that one [has] drawn from
this the names for various acts of the understanding.
From Aristotle's time on, logic has not gained much in content, by the
way, nor can it by its nature do so. But it can surely gain in regard to
exactness, determinateness, and distinctness. There are only a few sciences
that can attain a permanent condition, where they are not altered any
more. These include logic and also metaphysics. Aristotle had not omitted
any moment of the understanding; we are only more exact, methodical,
and orderly in this.
2i It was believed of Lambert's Organon10 that it would augment logic
' "Wesen."
534
considerably. But it contains nothing more except for subtler divisions,
which, like all correct subtleties, sharpen the understanding, of course,
but are of no essential use.
Among modern philosophers there are two who have set universal logic
in motion: Leibniz and Wolff.
Malebranche and Locke did not treat of real logic, since they also deal
with the content of cognition and with the origin of concepts.
The universal logic of Wolff" is the best we have. Some have combined
it with the Aristotelian logic, like Reusch,1* for example.
Baumgarten, a man who has much merit here, concentrated the Wolffian logic,'3 und Meier then commented again on Baumgarten.
Crusius1* also belongs to the modern logicians, but he did not consider
how things stand with logic. For his logic contains metaphysical principles
and so to this extent oversteps the limits of this science; besides, it puts
forth a criterion of truth that cannot be a criterion, and hence to this
extent gives free reign to all sorts of fantastic notions.
In present times there has not been any famous logician, and we do not
need any new inventions for logic, either, because it contains merely the
form of thought.
III.
Concept of philosophy in general - Philosophy considered according to
the scholastic concept and according to the worldly concept - Essential
requirements and ends of philosophizing - The most universal and
highest tasks of this science
It is sometimes hard to explain what is understood by a science. But the
science gains in precision through establishment of its determinate concept, and in this waymany mistakes are avoided which otherwise creep in,
for certain reasons, if one cannot yet distinguish the science from sciences
related to it.
Before we try to give a definition of philosophy, however, we must first 22
investigate the character of various cognitions themselves, and since philosophical cognitions belong to the cognitions of reason, we must explain in
particular what is to be understood by the latter.
Cognitions of reason are opposed to historical cognitions. The former
are cognitions from principles (ex principiis), the latter cognitions from data
(ex datis). —A cognition can have arisen from reason and in spite ofthat be
historical, however, as when a mere literator learns the products of someone else's reason his cognition of these products of reason is then merely
historical, for example.
One can distinguish cognitions, then,
535
1. according to their objective origin, i.e., according to the sources from which
alone a cognition is possible. In this respect all cognitions are either rational or
empirical;
2. according to their subjective origin, i.e., according to the way in which a
cognition can be acquired by men. Considered from this latter viewpoint,
cognitions are either rational or historical, however they may have arisen in
themselves. Hence something that is subjectively only historical can be objectively a cognition of reason.
With some rational cognitions it is harmful to know them merely historically, while with others it makes no difference. Thus the sailor knows the
rules of navigation historically from his tables, for example, and that is
enough for him. But if the jurist knows jurisprudence merely historically,
then he is fully ruined as a genuine judge, and still more so as a legislator.
From the stated distinction between objectively and subjectively rational
cognitions it is also clear now that one can in a certain respect learn
philosophy without being able to philosophize. He who really wants to
become a philosopher must practice making a free use of his reason, then,
and not a merely imitative and, so to speak, mechanical use.
We have explained cognitions of reason as cognitions from principles, and
23 from this it follows that they must be a priori. But there are two kinds of
cognitions, which are both a priori, but which nevertheless have many
noteworthy differences, namely, mathematics and philosophy.
It is customary to maintain that mathematics and philosophy are distinct
from one another as to their object, in that the former deals with quantity,
the latter with quality. But^ this is wrong. The distinction between these
sciences cannot rest on the object, for philosophy deals with everything,
hence also with quanta, and mathematics does so in part too, insofar as
everything has a quantity. The specific difference between these two
sciences is constituted only by the different kind of cognition of reason, or of
the use of reason, in mathematics and philosophy. Philosophy is, namely,
cognition of reasonfrom mere concepts, while mathematics is cognition of reason
from the construction of concepts.
We construct concepts when we exhibit them in intuition apriori without
experience, or when we exhibit in intuition the object that corresponds to
our concept of it. - The mathematician can never make use of his reason
in accordance with mere concepts, the philosopher never through construction of concepts. In mathematics one uses reason in concreto, but the
intuition is not empirical; rather, here one makes something the object of
intuition for himself apriori.
f Reading "Allein" for "Alles," in accordance with the published list of printer's errors
(KI, xli).
536
And as we see, mathematics has an advantage over philosophy here, in
that the cognitions of the former are intuitivecognitions while those of the
latter are only discursive. The cause of the fact that in mathematics we
consider quantities more lies in this, that quantities can be constructed a
priori in intuition, while qualities on the other hand cannot be exhibited in
intuition.
Philosophy is thus the system of philosophical cognitions or of cognitions
of reason from concepts. That is the scholastic conceptg of this science.
According to the worldly concept11 it is the science of the final ends of
human reason. This high concept gives philosophy dignity, i.e., an absolute worth. And actually it is philosophy, too, which alone has only inner 24
worth, and which first gives a worth to all other cognitions.
Yet in the end people always ask what purpose is served by philosophizing and by its final end[,] philosophy itself considered as science in accordance with the scholastic concept.
In this scholastic sense of the word, philosophy has to do only with skill,
but in relation to the worldly concept, on the other hand, with usefulness.
In the former respect it is thus a doctrine of skill; in the latter, a doctrine of
n>isdom[,] the legislator of reason[,] and the philosopher to this extent not
an artist of reason' but rather a legislator.
The artist of reason, or the philodox, as Socrates calls him, strives only
for speculative knowledge, without looking to see how much the knowledge contributes to the final end of human reason; he gives rules for the
use of reason for any sort of end one wishes. The practical philosopher,
the teacher of wisdom through doctrine and example, is the real philosopher. For philosophy is the idea of a perfect wisdom, which shows us the
final ends of human reason.
According to the scholastic concept, philosophy involves two things:
First, a sufficient supply of cognitions of reason, andrer the second thing,
a systematic connection of these cognitions, or a combination of them in
the idea of a whole.
Not only does philosophy allow such strictly systematic connection, it is
even the only science that has systematic connection in the most proper
sense, and it gives systematic unity to all other sciences.
As for what concerns philosophy according to the worldly concept (in
sensu cosmico), we can also call it a science of the highest maxim for the use of
our reason, insofar as we understand by a maxim the inner principle of
choice among various ends.
g "Schulbegriff."
* "Weltbegriffi."
' "Vemunfikunstler."
537
For philosophy in the latter sense is in fact the science of the relation of
all cognition and of all use of reason to the ultimate end of human reason,
to which, as the highest, all other ends are subordinated, and in which
they must all unite to form a unity.
25 The field of philosophy in this cosmopolitan sense can be brought
down to the following questions:
1. What can I know?
2. What ought I to do?
3. What may I hope?
4. What is man?
Metaphysics answers the first question, morals the second, religion the
third, and anthropology the fourth. Fundamentally, however, we could
reckon all of this as anthropology, because the first three questions relate
to the last one.
The philosopher must thus be able to determine
1. the sources of human knowledge,
2. the extent of the possible and profitable use of all knowledge, and finally
3. the limits of reason.
The last is the most necessary but also the hardest, yet the philodox
does not bother himself about it.
To a philosopher two things chiefly pertain: i) Cultivation of talent and
of skill, in order to use them for all sorts of ends. 2) Accomplishment in
the use of all means toward any end desired. The two must be united; for
without cognitions-' one will never become a philosopher, but cognitions*
alone will never constitute the philosopher either, unless there is in addition a purposive combination of all cognitions and skills in a unity, and an
insight into their agreement with the highest ends of human reason.
No one at all can call himself a philosopher who cannot philosophize.
Philosophizing can be learned, however, only through practice and
through one's own use of reason.
How should it be possible to learn philosophyanyway? Every philosophical thinker builds his own work, so to speak, on someone else's ruins, but
no work has ever come to be that was to be lasting in all its parts. Hence
one cannot learn philosophy, then, just because it is notyet given. But even
granted that there were a philosophy actually at hand, no one who learned it
would be able to say that he was a philosopher, for subjectively his cognition' of it would always be only historical.
26 In mathematics things are different. To a certain extent one can probably learn this science, for here the proofs are so evident that anyone can
; "Kenntnisse."
* "Kenntnisse."
' "Kenntniß."
538
become convinced of them; and on account of its evidence it can also, as it
were, be preserved as a certain and lasting doctrine.
He who wants to learn to philosophize, on the other hand, may regard
all systems of philosophy only as history of the use of reason and as objects
for the exercise of his philosophical talent.
Thus the true philosopher, as one who thinks for himself, must therefore make a free use of his reason on his own, not a slavishly imitative use.
But not a dialectical use, i.e.,not one that aims only at giving cognitions the
illusion of truth and wisdom. This is the business of the mere sophist,
thoroughly incompatible with the dignity of the philosopher, as one who is
acquainted with and is a teacher of wisdom.
For science has an inner, true worth only as organ of wisdom. As such,
however, it is also indispensable for it, so that one may well maintain that
wisdom without science is a silhouette of a perfection to which we shall
never attain.
He who hates science but loves wisdom all the more is called a
misologist. Misology arises commonly out of an emptiness of scientific
cognitions'" and a certain vanity bound up with that. Sometimes, however,
people who had initially pursued sciences with great industry and fortune,
but who found in the end no satisfaction in the whole of their knowledge,
also fall into the mistake of misology.
Philosophy is the only science that knows how to provide for us this
inner satisfaction, for it closes, as it were, the scientific circle, and only
through it do the the sciences attain order and connection.
For the sake of practice in thinking for ourselves, or philosophizing, we
will have to look more to the method for the use of our understanding than
to the propositions themselves at which we have arrived through this
method.
IV. 27
Short sketch of a history of philosophy
There is some difficulty in determining the limits where the common use
of the understanding ends and the speculative begins, or where common
cognition of reason becomes philosophy.
Nevertheless there is a rather certain distinguishing mark here, namely,
the following:
Cognition of the universal in abstracto is speculative cognition, cognition
of the universal in concrete is common cognition. Philosophical cognition is
speculative cognition of reason, and thus it begins where the common use
of reason starts to make attempts at cognition of the universal in abstracto.
m "Kenntnissen."
539
From this determination of the distinction between common and speculative use of reason we can now pass judgment on the question, with
which people we must date the beginning of philosophizing. Among all
peoples, then, the Greeks first began to philosophize. For they first attempted to cultivate cognitions of reason, not with images as the guiding
thread, but in abstracto, while other peoples always sought to make concepts understandable only through images in concrete. Even today there are
peoples, like the Chinese and some Indians, who admittedly deal with
things that are derived merely from reason, like God, the immortality of
the soul, etc., but who nonetheless do not seek to investigate the nature of
these things in accordance with concepts and rules in abstracto. They
make no separation here between the use of the understanding in concrete
and that in abstracto. Among the Persians and the Arabs there is admittedly
some speculative use of reason, but the rules for this they borrowed from
Aristotle, hence from the Greeks. In Zoroaster's Zend-Avesta we find not the
slightest trace of philosophy. The same holds also for the prized Egyptian
wisdom, which in comparison with Greek philosophy was mere child's
PlayAs in philosophy, so too in regard to mathematics, the Greeks were the
first to cultivate this part of the cognition of reason in accordance with a
speculative, scientific method, by demonstrating every theorem from
elements.
28 When and where the philosophical spirit first arose among the Greeks,
however, one cannot really determine.
The first to introduce the speculative use of reason, and the one from
whom we derived the first steps of the human understanding toward
scientific culture, is Thales, the founder of the Ionian sect. He bore the
surname physicist, although he was also a mathematician, just as in general
mathematics has always preceded philosophy.
The first philosophers clothed everything in images, by the way. For
poetry, which is nothing other than a clothing of thoughts in images, is
older than prose. Thus in the beginning one had to make use of the
language of images and of poetic style even with things that are merely
objects of pure reason. Pherecydes is supposed to have been the first author
of prose.
The lonians were followed by the Eleatics. The principle of the Eleatic
philosophy and of its founder, Xenophanes, was: In the senses there is deception and illusion, the source of truth lies only in the understanding alone.
Among the philosophers of this school, Zeno distinguished himself as a
man of great understanding and acuity and as a subtle dialectician.
In the beginning dialectic meant the art of the pure use of the understanding in regard to abstract concepts separated from all sensibility.
Thus the many encomia of this art among the ancients. Subsequently
these philosophers, who completely rejected the testimony of the senses,
540
necessarily fell, given their claim, into many subtleties, and thus dialectic
degenerated into die art of maintaining and of disputing any proposition.
And so it became a mere exercise for the sophists, who wanted to engage in
reasoning" about everything, and who devoted diemselves to giving illusion the veneer of trudi and to making black white. On account of this the
name sophist, by which one formerly meant a man who was able to speak
about all things rationally and with insight, became so hated and contemptible, and the name philosopher was introduced instead.
Around the time of the Ionian school there appeared in Magna Graecia a
man of strange genius, who not only founded a school but also outlined 29
and brought into being a project, the like of which had never been before.
This man was Pythagoras, born on" Samos. He founded, namely, a society
of philosophers who were united with one another into a federation
through the law of silence. His divided his hearers into two classes: the
acusmatics (äxouonaÖixoi), who had simply to listen, and the acroamatics
(ccxooauctoixoi), who were permitted to asktoo.
Among his doctrines there were some exoteric ones, which he expounded to die whole of the people; the remaining ones were secret and
esoteric, determined only for the members of his federation, some of whom
he took into his trusted friendship, separating diem wholly from the
others. He made physics and theology, hence the doctrines of the visible
and the invisible, the vehicle of his secret doctrines. He also had various
symbols, which presumably were nothing odier than certain signs that
allowed the Pytiiagoreans to communicate widi one another.
The end of his federation seems to have been none other than to purify
religion of the delusions of the people, to moderate tyranny, and to introduce more
lawfulness into states. This federation, which die tyrants began to fear, was
destroyed shortly before Pythagoras's death, however, and this philosophical society was broken up, partly by execution, partly by the flight and the
banning of the greatest part of its members. The few who remained were
novices. And since these knew little of die doctrines peculiar to Pythagoras,
we can say notiiing certain and determinate about them. Subsequendy
many doctrines dial were certainly only invented were attributed to
Pythagoras, who by die way was also a very madiematical mind.
The most important epoch of Greek philosophy starts finally with Socrates.
For it was he who gave to die philosophical spirit and to all speculative
raissomren.
Reading "auf" for "zu," with the published list of printer's errors (KI, xli).
541I M M A N U E L KANT
minds a wholly new practical direction. Among all men, too, he was almost
the only one whose behavior comes closest to the idea of a wise man.
Among his disciples the most famous is Plato, who occupied himself
30 more with Socrates' practical doctrines, and among Plato's disciples Aristotle, who in turn raised speculative philosophy higher.
Plato and Aristotle were followed by the Epicureans and the Stoics, who
were openly declared mutual enemies. The former placed the highest good
in a joyful heart, which they called pleasure-/ the latter found it solely in
loftiness and strength of soul, whereby one can do without all the comforts of
life.
The Stoics, by the way, were dialectical in speculative philosophy, dogmatic in moral philosophy, and in their practical principles, through which
they sowed the seed for the most sublime sentiments* that ever existed,
they showed uncommonly much dignity. The founder of the Stoic school
is Zeno of Citium. The most famous men from this school among the
Greek philosophers are Cleanthes and Chrysippus.
The Epicurean school was never able to achieve the same repute that
the Stoic did. Whatever one may say of the Epicureans, however, this
much is certain: they demonstrated the greatest moderation in enjoyment
and were the best natural philosophers among all the thinkers of Greece.
We note here further that the foremost Greek schools bore particular
names. Thus Plato's school was called the Academy, Aristotle's the Lyceum, the Stoics' school porticus (oioot), a covered walkway, from which
the name Stoic is derived; Epicurus's school was called horti, because
Epicurus taught in gardens.
Plato's Academy was followed by three other Academies, which were
founded by his disciples. Speusippus founded the first, Arcesilaus the second, Carneades the third.
These Academies inclined toward skepticism. Speusippus and Arcesilaus
both adjusted their mode of thought to skepticism, and in this Carneades
went still further. On this account the skeptics, these subtle, dialectical
thinkers, are also called Academics. Thus the Academics followed the first
great doubter, Pyrrho, and his successors. Their teacher Plato had himself
given them occasion for this by expounding many of his doctrines dialogically, so that the grounds pro and contra were put forth, without his deciding about the matter himself, although he was otherwise very dogmatic.
31 If we begin the epoch of skepticism with Pyrrho, then we get a whole
school of skeptics, who are essentially distinct from the dogmatists in their
mode of thought and method of philosophizing, in that they made it the
first maxim for all philosophizing use of reason to withhold one's judgment
"Wollust."
"Gesinnungen."
542
even when the semblance' of truth is greatest; and they advanced the principle
that philosophy consists in the equilibrium of judgment and teaches us to uncover
false semblance.1 From these skeptics nothing has remained for us, however,
but the two works of Sextus Empiricus, in which he brought together all
doubts.
When philosophy subsequently passed from the Greeks to the Romans, it
was not extended; for the Romans always remained just disciples.
Cicero was a disciple of Plato in speculative philosophy, a Stoic in
morals. The Stoic sect included as die most famous Epictetus, Antonius the
Philosopher, and Seneca. There were no naturalists among the Romans
except for Pliny the Elder^ who left a natural history.
Finally culture disappeared among the Romans too, and barbarism
arose until the Arabs began in die 6th and yth centuries to apply themselves to the sciences and to revive Aristotle again. Then the sciences rose
in the Occident again, and in particular the regard for Aristotle, who was
followed, however, in a slavish way. In die nth and i2th centuries the
scholastics appeared; they elucidated Aristode and pursued his subtleties to
infinity. They occupied themselves with nothing but abstractions. This
scholastic mediod of pseudo-philosophizing was pushed aside at die time
of the Reformation, and now there were eclectics in philosophy, i.e., thinkers who thought for themselves, who acknowledged no school, but who
instead sought the trudi and accepted it where they found it.
Philosophy owes its improvement in modern times partly to the greater
study of nature, partly to die combination of madiematics with natural
science. The order diat arose in thought through the study of these
sciences was also extended over die particular branches and parts of 32
philosophy proper. The first and greatest investigator of nature in modern
time was Bacon ofVerulam. In his investigations he followed the path of
experience and called attention to the importance and indispensability of
observations and experiments for the discovery of truth. It is hard to say, by
the way, from whence the improvement of speculative philosophy really
comes. Descartes rendered it no small service, in that he contributed much
to giving distinctness to thought by advancing his criterion of truth, which he
placed in the clarity and evidence of cognition.
Leibniz and Locke are to be reckoned among the greatest and most
meritorious reformers of philosophy in our times. The latter sought to
analyze die human understanding and to show which powers of die soul
and which of its operations belonged to this or that cognition. But he did
not complete the work of his investigation, and also his procedure is very
'"Scheine?'
"Schein."
543
dogmatic, although we did gain from him, in that we began to study the
nature of the soul better and more thoroughly.
As for what concerns the special dogmatic method of philosophizing
peculiar to Leibniz and Wolff, it was quite mistaken. Also, there is so much
in it that is deceptive that it is in fact necessary to suspend the whole
procedure and instead to set in motion another, the method of critical
philosophizing, which consists in investigating the procedure of reason
itself, in analyzing the whole human faculty of cognition and examining
how far its limits may go.
In our age natural philosophy is in the most flourishing condition, and
among the investigators of nature there are great names, e.g., Newton.
Modern philosophers cannot now be called excellent and lasting, because
everything here goes forward, as it were, in flux. What one builds the
other tears down.
In moral philosophy we have not come further than the ancients. As for
what concerns metaphysics, however, it seems as if we had been stopped
short in the investigation of metaphysical truths. A kind of indifferentem
toward this science now appears, since it seems to be taken as an honor to
speak of metaphysical investigations contemptuously as mere cavilling.'
And yet metaphysics is the real, true philosophy!
33 Our age is the age of critique, and it has to be seen what will come of the
critical attempts of our time in respect to philosophy and in particular to
metaphysics.
V.
Cognition in general —Intuitive and discursive cognition; intuition
and concept and in particular their difference —Logical and aesthetic
perfection of cognition
All our cognition has a twofold relation, yzrtf a relation to the object, second a
relation to the subject. In the former respect it is related to representation,
in the latter to consciousness, the universal condition of all cognition in
general. - (Consciousness isreally arepresentation that another representation is in me.)
In every cognition we must distinguish matter, i.e., the object, and form,
i.e., the way in which we cognize the object. If a savage sees a house from a
distance, for example, with whose use he is not acquainted, he admittedly
has before him in his representation the very same object as someone else
who is acquainted with it determinately as a dwelling established for men.
But as to form, this cognition of one and the same object is different in the
"Grübeleien."
544
two. With the one it is mere intuition, with the other it is intuition and
concept at the same time.
The difference in the form of the cognition rests on a condition that
accompanies all cognition, on consciousness. If I am conscious of the representation, it is clear, if I am not conscious of it, obscure.
Since consciousness is the essential condition of all logical form of
cognitions, logic can and may occupy itself only with clear but not with
obscure representations. In logic we do not see how representations arise,
but merely how they agree with logical form. In general logic cannot deal
at all with mere representations and their possibility either. This it leaves
to metaphysics. Logic itself is occupied merely with the rules of thought in
concepts, judgments, and inferences, as that through which all thought
takes place. Something precedes, of course, before a representation becomes a concept. We will indicate that in its place, too. But we will not 34
investigate how representations arise. Logic deals with cognition too, to be
sure, because in cognition there is already thought. But representation is
not yet cognition, rather, cognition always presupposes representation.
And this latter cannot be explained at all. For we would always have to
explain what representation is by means of yet another representation.
All clear representations, to which alone logical rules can be applied,
can now be distinguished in regard to distinctness and indistinctness. If we
are conscious of the whole representation, but not of the manifold that is
contained in it, then the representation is indistinct. First, to elucidate
this, an example in intuition.
We glimpse a country house in the distance. If we are conscious that the
intuited object is a house, then we must necessarilyhave a representation of
the various parts of this house, the windows, doors, etc. For if we did not see
the parts, we would not see the house itself either. But we are not conscious
of this representation of the manifold of its parts, and our representation of
the object indicated is thus itself an indistinct representation.
If we want an example of indistinctness in concepts, furthermore, then
the concept of beauty may serve. Everyone has a clear concept of beauty.
But in this concept many different marks occur, among others that the
beautiful must be something that (i.) strikes the senses and (2.) pleases
universally. Now if we cannot explicate the manifold of these and other
marks of the beautiful, then our concept of it is still indistinct.
Wolff's disciples call the indistinct representation a confused one. But
this expression is not fitting, because the opposite of confusion is not
distinctness but order. Distinctness is an effect of order, to be sure, and
indistinctness an effect of confusion; and every confused cognition is thus
also an indistinct one. But the proposition does not hold conversely; not
every indistinct cognition is a confused one. For in the case of cognitions
in which there is no manifold at hand, there is no order, but also no
confusion.
545
35 This is the situation with all simple representations, which never become distinct, not because there is confusion in them, but rather because
there is no manifold to be found in them. One must call them indistinct,
therefore, but not confused.
And even with compound representations, too, in which a manifold of
marks can be distinguished, indistinctness often derives not from confusion but from weakness of consciousness. Thus something can be distinct as
toform, i.e., I can be conscious of the manifold in the representation, but
the distinctness can diminish as to matter if the degree of consciousness
becomes smaller, although all the order is there. This is the case with
abstract representations.
Distinctness itself can be of two sorts:
First, sensible. This consists in the consciousness of the manifold in
intuition. I see the Milky Way as a whitish streak, for example; the light
rays from the individual stars located in it must necessarily have entered
my eye. But the representation of this was merely clear, and it becomes
distinct only through the telescope, because then I glimpse the individual
stars contained in the Milky Way.
Secondly, intellectual; distinctness in concepts or distinctness of the understanding. This rests on the analysis of the concept in regard to the manifold that
lies contained within it. Thus in the concept of virtue, for example, are
contained as marks (i.) the concept of freedom, (2.) the concept of adherence to rules (to duty), (3.) the concept of overpowering the force of the
inclinations, in case they oppose those rules. Now if we break up the
concept of virtue into its individual constituent parts, we make it distinct
for ourselves through this analysis. By thus making it distinct, however, we
add nothing to a concept; we only explain it. With distinctness, therefore,
concepts are improved not as to matter but only as toform.
If we reflect on our cognitions in regard to the two essentially different
36 basic faculties, sensibility and the understanding, from which they arise,
then here we come upon the distinction between intuitions and concepts.
Considered in this respect, all our cognitions are, namely, either intuitions
or concepts. The former have their source in sensibility, the faculty of
intuitions, the latter in the understanding, the faculty of concepts. This is
the logical distinction between understanding and sensibility, according to
which the latter provides nothing but intuitions, the former on the other
hand nothing but concepts. The two basic faculties may of course be
considered from another side and defined in another way: sensibility,
namely, as a faculty of receptivity, the understanding as a faculty of spontaneity. But this mode of explanation is not logical but rather metaphysical. It is
also customary to call sensibility the lower faculty, the understanding on
the other hand the higher faculty, on the ground that sensibility gives the
546
mere material for thought, but the understanding rules over this material
and brings it under rules or concepts.
The difference between aesthetic and logical perfection of cognition is
grounded on the distinction stated here between intuitive and discursive
cognitions, or between intuitions and concepts.
A cognition can be perfect either according to laws of sensibility or
according to laws of the understanding; in the former case it is aesthetically
perfect, in the other logically perfect. The two, aesthetic and logical perfection, are thus of different kinds; the former relates to sensibility, the latter
to the understanding. The logical perfection of cognition rests on its
agreement with the object, hence on universally valid laws, and hence we
can pass judgment on it according to norms a priori. Aesthetic perfection
consists in the agreement of cognition with the subject and is grounded on
the particular sensibility of man. In the case of aesthetic perfection, therefore, there are no objectively and universally valid laws, in relation to
which we can pass judgment on it a priori in a way that is universallyvalid
for all thinking beings in general. Insofar as there are nonetheless universal laws of sensibility, which have validity subjectively for the whole of
humanity although not objectively and for all thinking beings in general,
we can think of an aesthetic perfection that contains the ground of a
subjectively universal pleasure. This is beauty, that which pleases the 37
senses in intuition and can be the object of a universal pleasure just
because the laws of intuition are universal laws of sensibility.
Through this agreement with the universal laws of sensibility the really,
independently beautiful, whose essence consists in mere form, is distinguished in kind from the pleasant," which pleases^ merely in sensation
through stimulation or excitement, and which on this account can only be
the ground of a merely private pleasure.*
It is this essential aesthetic perfection, too, which, among all [perfections], is compatible with logical perfection and may best be combined
with it.
Considered from this side, aesthetic perfection in regard to the essentially beautiful can thus be advantageous to logical perfection. In another
respect it is also disadvantageous, however, insofar as we look, in the case
of aesthetic perfection, only to the non-essentially beautiful, the stimulating
or the exciting, which pleases the senses in mere sensation and does not
relate to mere form but rather to the matter of sensibility. For stimulation
and excitement, most of all, can spoil the logical perfection in our cognitions and judgments.
In general, however, there always remains a kind of conflict between the
* "dem Angenehmen."
" "gefällt."
* "eines bloßen Privat-Wohlgefallens."
547
aesthetic and the logical perfection of our cognition, which cannot be fully
removed. The understanding wants to be instructed, sensibility enlivened;
the first desires insight, the second comprehensibility. If cognitions are to
instruct then they must to that extent be thorough; if they are to entertain
at the same time, then they have to be beautiful as well. If an exposition is
beautiful but shallow, then it can only please sensibility but not the understanding, but if it is thorough yet dry, only the understanding but not
sensibility as well.
Since the needs of human nature and the end of popularity in cognition
demand, however, that we seek to unite the two perfections with one
another, we must make it our task to provide aesthetic perfection for those
cognitions that are in general capable of it, and to make a scholastically
38 correct, logically perfect cognition popular through its aesthetic form. But
in this effort to combine aesthetic with logical perfection in our cognitions
we must not fail to attend to the following rules, namely: (i.) that logical
perfection is the basis of all other perfections and hence cannot be wholly
subordinated or sacrificed to any other; (2.) that one should look principally to formal aesthetic perfection, the agreement of a cognition with the
laws of intuition, because it is just in this that the essentially beautiful,
which may best be combined with logical perfection, consists; (3.) that one
must be very cautious with stimulation and excitement, whereby a cognition
affects sensation and acquires an interest for it, because attention can
thereby so easily be drawn from the object to the subject, whence a very
disadvantageous influence on the logical perfection of cognition must
evidently arise.
To acquaint us better with the essential differences that exist between the
logical and the aesthetic perfection of cognition, not merely in the universal but from several particular sides, we want to compare the two with one
another in respect to the four chief moments of quantity, quality, relation,
and modality, on which the passing of judgment as to the perfection of
cognition depends.
A cognition is perfect (i.) as to quantity if it is universal; (2.) as to quality
if it is distinct; (3.) as to relation if it is true; and finally (4.) as to modality if
it is certain.
Considered from the viewpoints indicated, a cognition will thus be
logically perfect as to quantity if it has objective universality(universality
of the concept or of the rule), as to quality if it has objective distinctness
(distinctness in the concept), as to relation if it has objective truth, and
finally as to modality if it has objective certainty.
To these logical perfections correspond now the following aesthetic
perfections in relation to those four principal moments, namely
548
aesthetic universality. This consists in the applicability of a cognition to a 39
multitude of objects that serve as examples, to which application of it can be
made, and whereby it becomes useful at the same time for the end of popularity;
aesthetic distinctness. This is distinctness in intuition, in which a concept
thought abstractly is exhibited or elucidated in concrete through examples;
aesthetic truth. A merely subjective truth, which consists only in the agreement
of cognition with the subject and the laws of sensory illusion, and which is
consequently nothing more than a universal semblance/
aesthetic certainty. This rests on what is necessary in consequence of the
testimony of the senses, i.e., what is confirmed through sensation and experience.
With the perfections just mentioned two things are always to be found,
which in their harmonious union make up perfection in general, namely,
manifoldness and unity. Unity in the concept lies with the understanding,
unity of intuition with the senses.
Mere manifoldness without unity cannot satisfy us. And thus truth is
the principal perfection among them all, because it is the ground of unity
through the relation of our cognition to the object. Even in the case of
aesthetic perfection, truth always remains the conditio sine qua non, the
foremost negative condition, apart from which something cannot please
taste universally. Hence no one may hope to make progress in the belles
lettres^ if he has not made logical perfection the ground of his cognition. It
is in the greatest possible unification of logical with aesthetic perfection in
general, in respect to those cognitions that are both to instruct and to
entertain, that the character and the art of the genius actuallyshows itself.
VI. 40
PARTICULAR LOGICAL PERFECTIONS OF
COGNITION
A) Logical perfection of cognition as to quantity —Quantity —
Extensive and intensive quantity —Extensiveness and thoroughness or
importance andfruitfulness of cognition - Determination of the
horizon of our cognition
The quantity of cognition can be understood in two senses, either as
extensive or as intensive quantity. The former relates to the extension of
cognition and thus consists in its multitude and manifoldness; the latter
* "ein allgemeiner Schein."
7 "in schönen Wissenschaften."
549
relates to its content,* which concerns the richness" or the logical importance and fruitfulness of a cognition, insofar as it is considered as ground
of many and great consequences («0« multa sed multum.b)
In expanding our cognitions or in perfecting them as to their extensive
quantity it is good to make an estimate as to how far a cognition agrees
with our ends and capabilities. This reflection concerns the determination
of the horizon of our cognitions, by which is to be understood the congruence' of the quantity of all cognitions with the capabilities and ends of the subject.
The horizon can be determined
1. logically, in accordance with the faculty or the powers of cognition in relation
to the interest of the understanding. Here we have to pass judgment on how far
we can go in our cognitions, how far we must go, and to what extent certain
cognitions serve, in a logical respect, as means to various principal cognitions
as our ends;
2. aesthetically, in accordance with taste in relation to the interest of feeling. He
who determines his horizon aesthetically seeks to arrange science according
to the taste of the public, i.e., to make it popular, or in general to attain only
such cognitions as may be universally communicated, and in which the class
of the unlearned, too, find pleasure and interest;
41 3. practically, in accordance with use in relation to the interest of the will. The
practical horizon, insofar as it is determined according to the influence which
a cognition has on our morality, '^.pragmatic and is of the greatest importance.
Thus the horizon concernspassingjudgment on, and determining, what
man can know, what he is permitted to know, and what he ought to know.
Now as for what concerns the theoretically or logically determined horizon in particular - and it is of this alone that wecan speak here - we can
consider it either from the objective or from the subjective viewpoint.
In regard to objects, the horizon is either historical or rational. The
former is much broader than the other, indeed, it is immeasurably great,
for our historical cognition has no limits. The rational horizon, on the
other hand, may be fixed, e.g., it may be determined to what kind of
objects mathematical cognition cannot be extended. So too in respect of
philosophical cognition of reason, as to how far reason can go here a priori
without any experience.
In relation to the subject the horizon is either the universal and absolute,
or a particular and conditioned one (a private horizon).
By the absolute and universal horizon is to be understood the congru-
* "Gehalt."
" " Vielgültigkeit.'"
b
Not many but much.
' "Angemessen/teil."
550
ence1* of the limits of human cognitions with the limits of the whole of
human perfection in general. And here, then, the question is: In general,
what can man, as man, know?
The determination of the private horizon depends upon various empirical conditions' and special considerations, e.g., age, sex, station, mode of
life, etc. Every particular class of men has its particular horizon in relation
to its special powers of cognition, ends, and standpoints, every mind its
own horizon according to the standard of the individualityof its powers
and its standpoint. Finally, we can also think a horizon of healthy reason
and a horizon of science, which latter still requires principles, in accordance
with which to determine what we can and cannot know.
What we cannot know is beyondf our horizon, what we do not need to 42
know^ is outside* our horizon. This latter can hold only relatively, however,
in relation to various particular private ends, to whose accomplishment
certain cognitions not only do not contribute anything but could even be
an obstacle. For no cognition is, absolutely and for every purpose, useless
and unusable, although we may not always be able to have insight into its
use. Hence it is an objection as unwise as it is unjust that is made to great
men who labor in the sciences with painstaking industry when shallow
minds ask, What is the use ofthat?' We must simply never raise this question if we want to occupy ourselves with the sciences. Even granted that a
science could give results only concerning some possible object, it would
still for that reason alone be useful enough. Every logically perfect cognition always has some possible use, which, although we are as yet unacquainted with it, will perhaps be found by posterity. If in the cultivation of
the sciences one had always looked only to material gain, their use, then
we would have no arithmetic or geometry. Besides, our understanding is
so arranged that it finds satisfaction in mere insight, even more than in the
use that arises therefrom. Plato noted this. Man feels in this his own
excellence, he senses what it means to have understanding. Men who do
not sense this must envy the animals. The inner worth that cognitions have
through logical perfection is not to be compared with the outer, their worth
in application.
Like that which lies outside our horizon, insofar as we, in accordance
with our purposes, do not need to know it, as dispensable for us, that which
d "Congruenz."
' Ak, "empirischen undspeciellen Rücksichten"; ist ed., "empirischen Bedingungen und
speciellen Rücksichten."
f "über."
* "was wir nicht wissen dürfen oder nicht zu wissen brauchen."
* "außer."
' Reading "wozu das nütze" for "wozu ist das nütze" in accordance with the published list of
printer's errors (KI, xli).
551
lies beneath' our horizon, insofar as we ought not to know it as harmful to
us, is to be understood in a relative sense but never in an absolute one.
With respect to the extension and the demarcation of our cognition, the
following rules are to be recommended:
One must
43 i. determine his horizon early, but of course only when one can determine it
oneself, which usually does not occur before the 2oth year;
2. not alter it lightly or often (not turn from one thing to another);
3. not measure the horizon of others by one's own, and not consider as useless
what is of no use to us;it would be presumptuous to want to determine others'
horizons, because one is not sufficiently acquainted, in part with their capabilities, in part with their purposes;
4. neither extend it too far nor restrict it too much. For he who wants to know
too much ends by knowing nothing, and conversely, he who believes of some
things that they do not concern him, often deceives himself; as when, e.g., the
philosopher believes of history that it is dispensable for him[.]
One should also seek
5. to determine in advance the absolute horizon of the whole human race (as to
past and to future time), as well as also
6. to determine, in particular, the position that our science occupies in the whole
of cognition. The Universal Encyclopedia serves for this as a universal map
(mappe-mondek) of the sciencesf.]
7. In determining his own particular horizon one should carefully consider for
which part of cognition one has the greatest capability and pleasure, what is
more or less necessary in regard to certain duties, what cannot coexist with
the necessary duties; and finally
8. one should of course always seek to expand his horizon rather than to narrow
it.
As for the extension of cognition, there need be no concern in general
about what concerned d'Alembert.16 For the burden does not press us
down, but rather the volume of space for our cognitions constrains us.
Critique of reason, of history and historical writings, a universalspirit that
deals with human cognition en gros and not merely in detail^, will always
make the extension smaller, without diminishing anything in the content.
The metal merely separates from the slag, or the inferior vehicle, the
44 husk, which was necessary for so long. With the extension of natural
history, of mathematics, etc., new methods will be invented which will
shorten the old and make the multitude of books dispensable. It will be
because of the invention of such new methods and principles that we will
be able, with their help, to find anything we desire without burdening
> "unter.'"
* French: mappemonde, map of the world.
552
memory. Thus he who brings history under ideas that can always remain
renders it service as a genius.
Opposed to the logical perfection of cognition in regard to its extension
stands ignorance.' A negative imperfection, or imperfection of lack, which,
on account of the restrictions of the understanding, is inseparable from
our cognition.
We can consider ignorance from an objective or from a subjective viewpoint.
1. Taken objectively, ignorance is either material orformal. The former
consists in a lack of historical cognitions, the other in a lack of rational
cognitions. One does not have to be completely ignorant in any field, but
one can well restrict historical knowledge in order to devote oneself more
to rational knowledge, or conversely.
2. In the subjective sense, ignorance is either learned, scientific, or is
common. He who has distinct insight into the restrictions of cognition,
hence into the field of ignorance from where it begins, e.g., the philosopher who sees and proves how little one can know of gold in regard to its
structure due to a lack of the requisite data, is ignorant artfully™ or in a
learned way. He who is ignorant, on the other hand, without having
insight into the grounds of the limits of knowledge, and without concerning himself with this, is so in a common, not a scientific way. Such a one
does not even know that he knows nothing. For one can never represent
his ignorance except through science, as a blind man cannot represent
darkness until he has become sighted.
Cognition" of one's ignorance presupposes science, then, and makes
one at the same time modest, while imagined knowledge puffs one up.
Hence Socrates' non-knowledge" was a laudable ignorance, reallya knowl- 45
edge of non-knowledge, according to his own admission. It is precisely
those who possess very many cognitions/ then, and who for all that are
astounded at the multitude of what they do not know, who cannot be
reproached with their ignorance.
Ignorance in things whose cognition lies beyond our horizon is in
general irreproachable (inculpabilis), and in regard to the speculative use of
our faculty of cognition it can be allowed (although only in the relative
sense), insofar as the objects here lie not beyond our horizon but yet outside
it. It is shameful, however, in things that it is quite necessary and also easy
to know.
' "Unwissenheit"
m "kunstmäßig."
* "Kenntniß."
' "Nichtwissen."
' "Kenntnisse."
553
There is a distinction between not knowing something and ignoring
something, i.e., taking no notice of it. It is good to ignore much that it is not
good for us to know. Abstracting is distinct from both of these. One abstracts from a cognition when one ignores its application, whereby one
gets it in abstracto and can better consider it in the universal as a principle.
Such abstraction from what does not belong to our purpose in the cognition of a thing is useful and praiseworthy.
Scholars in matters of reason* are commonly ignorant historically.
Historical knowledge without determinate limits is poly history; this puffs
one up. Polymathy has to do with cognition of reason. Both historical and
rational knowledge, when extended without determinate limits, can be
called pansophy. Historical knowledge includes the science of die tools of
learnedness - philology, which comprises a critical acquaintance with
books and languages (literature and linguistics).
Mere polyhistory is cyclopic learnedness, which lacks one eye, the eye of
philosophy, and a cyclops among mathematicians, historians, natural historians, philologists, and linguists is a learned man who is great in all these
matters, but who for all that holds all philosophy to be dispensable.
One part of philology is constituted by the humaniora, by which is
understood acquaintance with the ancients, which furthers die unification
of science with taste, which rubs off coarseness and furthers die communicability and urbanity in which humanity consists.
46 The humaniora,then, concern instruction in what serves the cultivation
of taste, in conformity with the models of the ancients. This includes, e.g.,
eloquence, poetry, wide reading in the classical authors, etc. All these
humanistic cognitions' can be reckoned in the practical part of philology,
which aims in the first instance at the cultivation of taste. If we separate
the mere philologist from the humanist, however, die two would differ
from one anotiier in dial die former seeks die tools of learnedness among
the ancients, the latter die tools for the cultivation of taste.
The belletrist, or bei esprit,1 is a humanist according to contemporary
models in living languages. He is not learned, then, for only dead languages are now learned languages, but is radier a mere dilettante in
cognitions of taste' in accordance with fashion, with no need for the
ancients. We could call him one who apes the humanist. The polyhistor
must, as philologist, be a linguist and a literator, and as humanist a
classicist and expositor of the classics. As philologist he is cultivated, as
humanist civilized.
"Vernunftlehrer."
"Kenntnisse."
French: aesthete, belletrist.
"Geschmackskenntnisse."
554
In regard to the sciences, there are two degenerate forms of prevailing
taste: pedantry and gallantry." The one pursues the sciences only for the
school and thereby restricts them in respect of their use, the other pursues
them merely for intercourse or for the world and in this way restricts them
in respect of their content.
The pedant is either opposed, as learned man, to the man of the world,
and is to this extent the puffed up man of learning, unacquainted with the
world, i.e., with the ways of bringing his science to bear on men; or he is to
be considered, in general, as a man of skill, but only informalities, not as to
essence and as to his end. In the latter sense he is z fanatic for formalities?
restricted in regard to the core of things, he looks only to the clothing and
the shell. He is the unfortunate imitation or caricature of the methodical
mind. Thus pedantry can also be called cavilling fussiness1" and useless
exactitude (micrology) in formalities. And such formality of scholastic
method outside the schools is to be found not merely among learned
people and in learned things, but also in other classes and in other things. 47
What is the ceremonial at court and in intercourse but a pursuit of formalities"
and hair-splitting.' In the military this is not completely so, although it
seems so. But in conversation, in clothing, in diet, in religion, a good deal
of pedantry often prevails.
Thoroughness (scholarly, scholastic perfection2) is a purposeful exactitude in formalities. Pedantry is thus an affected thoroughness, just as
gallantry, as a mere courtesan seeking the approval of taste, is nothing but
an affected popularity. For gallantryonly strives to gain the reader's affection and thus never to insult him with a hard word.
To avoid pedantry requires extensive cognitions" not only in the sciences themselves but also in regard to their use. Only the true man of
learning, then, can free himself from pedantry, which is always the property of a restricted mind.
In striving to procure for our cognition the perfection of scholastic
thoroughness and at the same time of popularity, without falling into the
indicated mistakes of affected thoroughness or of affected popularity, we
must look above all to the scholastic perfection of our cognition, the
scholastically correct form of thoroughness; and only then may we concern ourselves about how we are to make our cognition, methodically
learned in school, truly popular, i.e., easily and universally communicable
to others, in such a way that thoroughness is not displaced by popularity.
" "Galanterie."
° "Formalienklauber."
" "grüblerische Peinlichkeit."
* "Formalienjagd."
* "Klauberei."
z "schulgerechte, scholastische Vollkommenheit."
" "Kenntnisse."
555
For scholastic perfection, without which all science is nothing but tricks
and trifling,* must not be sacrificed for the sake of popular perfection, to
please the people.
To learn true popularity, however, one must read the ancients, e.g.,
Cicero's philosophical writings, the poets Horace, Virgil, etc., and among
the moderns Hume, Shaftesbury, et. al. Men who have all had a good deal
of intercourse with the refined world, without which one cannot be popular. For true popularity demands a good deal of practical acquaintance
with the world and with men, acquaintance with men's concepts, taste,
and inclinations, to which constant regard must be given in presentation
and even in the choice of expressions that are fitting and adequate to
48 popularity. This ability to descend' to the public's power of comprehension and to the customary expressions, in which scholastic perfection is
not slighted, but in which the clothing of thoughts is merely so arranged
that the framework, the scholastically correct and technical in that perfection,
may not be seen (just as one draws lines with a pencil, writes on them, and
subsequently erases them) - this truly popular perfection of cognition is
in fact a great and rare perfection, which shows much insight into the
science. It has this merit, too, in addition to many others, that it can
provide a proof of complete insight into a thing. For the merely scholastic
examination of a cognition leaves doubt as to whether that examination is
not one-sided and whether the cognition itself has a worth admitted by all
men. The school has its prejudices, just as does the common understanding. One improves the other here. It is therefore important that a cognition be examined by men whose understanding does not depend on any
school.
This perfection of cognition, whereby it qualifies for easy and universal
communication, could also be called external extension/ or the extensive
quantity of a cognition, insofar as it is widespread externally among men.
Since cognitions are so many and manifold, one will do well to make
himself a plan, in accordance with which he orders the sciences in the way
that best agrees with, and contributes to the furtherance of, his ends. All
cognitions stand in a certain natural connection with one another. Now if,
in striving to expand his cognitions, one does not look to their connection,
then extensive knowledge' amounts to nothing more than a mere rhapsody.
If one makes one principal science his end, however, and considers all
other cognitions only as means for achieving it, then he brings a certain
systematic character into his knowledge. And in order to go to work on
* "Spielwerk und Tändelei."
' "Eine solche Herablassung (Condescendenz)."
4 "äußere Extension."
' "Vielwissen."
556
extending his cognitions according to such a well ordered and purposive
plan, one must seek, therefore, to become acquainted with this connection
of cognitions among themselves. For this, the sciences get guidance from
architectonic, which is a system in accordance with ideas, in which the sciences 49
are considered in regard to their kinship and systematic connection in a whole of
cognition that interests humanity.
Now as for what concerns the intensive quantity? of cognition —i.e., its
content, or its richness^ and importance, which is essentially distinct from
its extensive quantity, its mere extensiveness, as we noted above - wewant
here to add only the following few remarks:
1. A cognition that is concerned with what is great, i.e., with the whole in the use
of the understanding, is to be distinguished from subtlety in what is small
(micrology).
2. Every cognition that furthers logical perfection as to form is to be called
logically important, e.g., every mathematical proposition, every law of nature
into which we have distinct insight, every correct philosophical explanation.
Practical importance cannot be foreseen, one must simply wait and watch for it.
3. Importance must not be confused with difficulty.11 A cognition can be difficult
without being important, and conversely. Difficulty, then, does not decide
either for or against the worth or the importance of a cognition. This rests on
the quantity or multiplicity of its consequences. A cognition is the more
important accordingly as it has more or greater consequences, as the use that
may be made of it is more. Cognition without important consequences is
called cavilling;' scholastic philosophy, e.g., was of this sort.
VII.
B) Logical perfection of cognition as to relation - Truth -Material
and formal, orlogical, truth - Criteria of logical truth - Falsehood
and error —Illusion, as source of error —Means for avoiding errors
A principal perfection of cognition, indeed, the essential and inseparable
condition of all its perfection, is truth. Truth, it is said, consists in the 50
agreement of cognition with its object. In consequence of this mere nominal explanation, my cognition, to count as true, is supposed to agree with
its object. Now I can compare the object with my cognition, however, only
by cognizing it. Hence my cognition is supposed to confirm itself, which is
far short of being sufficient for truth. For since the object is outside me,
f Ak, "intensive Größe"; ist ed., "intensive Größe."
g "Vielgültigkeit."
* "Schwere."
' "Grübelei."
557
the cognition in me, all I can ever pass judgment on is whether my
cognition of the object agrees with my cognition of the object. The ancients called such a circle in explanation a diallelon.' And actually the
logicians were always reproached with this mistake by the skeptics, who
observed that with this explanation of truth it is just as when someone
makes a statement before a court and in doing so appeals to a witness with
whom no one is acquainted, but who wants to establish his credibility by
maintaining that the one who called him as witness is an honest man. The
accusation was grounded, too. Only the solution of the indicated problem
is impossible without qualification and for every man.
The question here is, namely, whether and to what extent there is a
criterion of truth that is certain, universal, and useful in application. For
this is what the question, What is truth?, ought to mean.
To be able to decide this important question we must distinguish that
which belongs to the matter in our cognition and is related to the object
from that which concerns its mereform, as that condition without which a
cognition would in general never be a cognition. With respect to this
distinction between the objective, material relation in our cognition and the
subjective, formal relation, the question above thus breaks down into these
two particular ones:
1. Is there a universal material, and
2. Is there a universal formal criterion of truth?
A universal material criterion of truth is not possible; it is even selfcontradictory. For as a universal criterion, valid for all objects in general, it
would have to abstract fully from all difference among objects, and yet at
the same time, as a material criterion, it would have to deal with just this
difference, in order to be able to determine whether a cognition agrees
51 with just that object to which it is related and not just with any object in
general, in which case nothing would really be said. Material truth must
consist in this agreement of a cognition with just that determinate object
to which it is related, however. For a cognition that is true in regard to one
object can be false in relation to other objects. Hence it is absurd to
demand a universal material criterion of truth, which should abstract and
at the same time not abstract from all difference among objects.
If the question is about universal formal criteria of truth, however, then
here it is easy to decide that of course there can be such a thing. For formal
truth consists merely in the agreement of cognition with itself, in complete
abstraction from all objects whatsoever and from all difference among
them. And the universal formal criteria of truth are accordingly nothing
other than universal logical marks of the agreement of cognition with itself
Ak, "Diallele"; ist ed., "Diallele."
558
or - what isoneandthe same - with theuniversal laws of the understanding and of reason.
These formal, universal criteria are of course not sufficient for objective truth, but they are nonetheless to be regarded as its conditio sine qua
non.
For the question of whether cognition agrees with its objects must be
preceded by the question of whether it agrees with itself (as to form). And
this is a matter for logic.
The formal criteria of truth in logic are
1. the principle of contradiction,
2. the principle of sufficient reason.
Through die former the logical possibility of a cognition is determined,
through the latter its logical actuality.
To the logical actuality of a cognition it pertains, namely:
First: that it be logicallypossible, i.e., not contradict itself. This characteristic of internal logical truth is only negative, however; for a cognition that
contradicts itself is of course false, but if it does not contradict itself it is
not always true.
Second: that it be logically grounded, i.e., that it (a) have grounds and (b)
not have false consequences.
This second criterion of external logical truth or of accessibility to reason,* 52
which concerns the logical connection of a cognition with grounds and
consequences, is positive. And here the following rules are valid:
1. From the truth of the consequence we may infer the truth of the cognition as
ground, but only negatively: if one false consequence flows from a cognition,
then the cognition itself is false. For if the ground were true, then the consequence would also have to be true, because the consequence is determined by
the ground.
But one cannot infer conversely that if no false consequence flows from
a cognition, then it is true; for one can infer true consequences from a
false ground.
2. If all the consequences of a cognition are true, then the cognition is true too. For if
there were something false in the cognition, then there would have to be a
false consequence too.
From the consequence, then, we may infer to a ground, but without
being able to determine this ground. Only from the complex of all consequences can one infer to a determinate ground, infer that it is the true
ground.
The former mode of inference, according to which the consequence
"Rationabilitat."
559
can only be a negatively and indirectly sufficient criterion of the truth of a
cognition, is called in logic the apagogic mode (modus tollens).
This procedure, of which frequent use is made in geometry, has the
advantage that I may derive just one false consequence from a cognition in
order to prove its falsehood. To show, e.g.,that the earth is not flat, I may
just infer apagogically and indirectly, without bringing forth positive and
direct grounds: If the earth were flat, then the pole star would always have
to be at the same height; but this is not die case, consequently it is not flat.
With the other, the positive and direct mode of inference (modus ponens)
the difficulty enters that the totality of the consequences cannot be
cognized apodeictically, and that one is therefore led by the indicated
mode of inference only to a probable and hypothetically true cognition
(hypotheses), in accordance witii the presupposition that where many
consequences are true, all the remaining ones' may be truetoo.
Thus we will be able to advance three principles here as universal,
merely formal or logical criteria of truth; these are
1. the principle of contradiction and of identity (principium contradictionis and identita-
53 tis), through which the internal possibility of a cognition is determined for
problematicjudgments;
2. the principle of sufficient reason (principium rationis suffidentis), on which rests
the (logical) actuality of a cognition, the fact that it is grounded, as material for
assertoric judgments;
3. the principle of the excluded middle (principium exclusi medii inter duo contradictoriam), on which the (logical) necessity of a cognition is grounded - that we
must necessarily judge thus and not otherwise, i.e., that the opposite is false -
for apodeictic judgments.
The opposite of truth is falsehood, which, insofar as it is taken for truth, is
called error. An erroneous judgment - for there is error as well as truth
only in judgment - is thus one that confuses the illusion of truth with
truth itself.
It is easy to have insight into how truth ispossible, since here the understanding acts in accordance with its essential laws.
But it is hard to comprehend how error in theformal sense of the word,i.e.,
how the form of thought contrary to the understanding is possible, just as we
cannot in general comprehend how any power should deviate from its own
essential laws. We cannot seek the ground of errors in the understanding
itself and its essential laws, then, just as little as we can in the restrictions of
the understanding, in which lies the cause of ignorance, to be sure, but not
in any way the cause of error. Now if we had no other power of cognition
but the understanding, we would never err. But besides the understand-
' Ak, "auch alle"; ist ed., "alle auch."
™ principle of the excluded middle between two contradictories.
560
ing, there lies in us another indispensable source of cognition. That is
sensibility, which gives us the material for thought, and in doing this works
according to other laws than those the understanding does. Error cannot
arise from sensibility in and by itself, however, because the senses simply
do not judge.
The ground for the origin of all error will therefore have to be sought
simply and solely in the unnoticed influence of sensibility upon the understanding, or to speak more exactly, upon judgment. This influence, namely, 54
brings it about that in judgment we take merely subjective grounds to be
objective, and consequently confuse the mere illusion of truth with truth itself.
For it is just in this that the essence of illusion consists, which on this
account is to be regarded as a ground for holding a false cognition to be
true.
What makes error possible, then, is illusion, in accordance with which
the merely subjective is confused in judgment with the objective.
In a certain sense, however, one can make the understanding the author
of errors, namely, insofar as it allows itself, due to a lack of requisite
attention to that influence of sensibility, to be misled by the illusion arising
therefrom into holding merely subjective determining grounds of judgment to be objective ones, or into letting that which is true only according
to the laws of sensibility hold as true in accordance with its own laws.
In the restrictions of the understanding, then, lies only the responsibility for ignorance; the responsibility for error we have to assign to ourselves. Nature has denied us many cognitions, to be sure, it leaves us in
unavoidable ignorance concerning so much, but still it does not cause
error. We are misled into this by our own inclination to judge and to
decide even where, on account of our limitedness, we are not able to
judge and to decide.
Every error into which the human understanding can fall is onlypartial,
however, and in every erroneous judgment there must always lie something true. For a total error would be a complete opposition to the laws of
the understanding and of reason. But how could that, as such, in anyway
come from the understanding and, insofar as it is still a judgment, be held
to be a product of the understanding.
In respect to the true and the erroneous in our cognition, we distinguish
an exact cognition from a rough one.
Cognition is exact when it is adequate to its object, or when there is not
the slightest error in regard to its object, and it is rough when there can be
errors in it yet without being a hindrance to its purpose.
This distinction concerns the broader or narrower determinateness of our 55
cognition (cognitio late vel stride determinata). Initially it is sometimes necessary to determine a cognition in a broader extension (late determinare),
561
particularly in historical things. In cognitions of reason everything must be
determined exactly (striae), however. In the case of broad determination
one says that a cognition is determined praeter propter." Whether a cognition ought to be determined roughly or exactly always depends on its
purpose. Broad determination leaves a certain play for error, which still
can have its determinate limits, however. Error occurs particularly where a
broad determination is taken for a strict one,e.g., in matters ofmorality,"
where everything must be determined striae. Those who do not do this are
called by die English latitudinarians.
One can distinguish subtlety, as a subjective perfection of cognition, from
exactness, as an objective perfection - since here cognition is fully congruent with its object.
A cognition is subtle when one discovers in it that which usually escapes
the attention of others. It requires a higher degree of attention, then, and
a greater application of power of the understanding.
Many reprove all subtlety because they cannot attain it. But in itself it
always brings honor to the understanding and is even laudable and necessary, insofar as it is applied to an object worthy of observation. When one
could have attained the same end with less attention and effort of the
understanding, however, and yet one uses more, then one makes a useless
expense and falls into subtleties, which are difficult, to be sure, but do not
have any use (nugae difficilesp).
As the rough is opposed to the exact, so is the crude to the subtle.
From the nature of error - whose concept, as we noted, contains as an
essential mark, besides falsehood, also the illusion of truth - we get the
following important rule for the truth of our cognition:
56 To avoid errors - and no error is unavoidable, at least not absolutely or
without qualification, although it can be unavoidable relatively, for the
cases where it is unavoidable for us to judge, even with the danger of
error - to avoid errors, then, one must seek to disclose and to explain
their source, illusion. Very few philosophers have done that, however.
They have only sought to refute the errors themselves, without indicating
the illusion from which they arise. This disclosure and breaking up of
illusion is a far greater service to truth, however, than the direct refutation
of errors, whereby one does not block their source and cannot guard
against the same illusion misleading one into errors again in other cases
because one is not acquainted with it. For even if we are convinced that we
have erred, then in case the illusion diat grounds our error has not been
" approximately.
° Ak, "Modalität"; ist ed., "Moralität."
f difficult trivialities.
562
removed we still have scruples, however little we can bring forth in justification of them.
Through the explanation of illusion, furthermore, one grants to the one
who erred a kind of fairness. For no one will admit that he erred without
any illusion of truth, which might even have deceived someone more
acute, because here it is a matter of subjective grounds.
Where the illusion is evident even to the common understanding (sensus
communis), an error is called a stupidity or an absurdity. The charge of
absurdity is always a personal reproof, which one must avoid, particularly
in the refutation of errors.
For to him who maintains an absurdity, the very illusion that lies at the
ground of the evident falsehood is not evident. One must first make this
illusion evident to him. Then if he still persists, he is admittedly stupid;
but then nothing more can be undertaken with him either. He has thereby
made himself just as incapable of further correction and refutation as he is
unworthy of it. For one cannot really prove to anyone that he is absurd;
here all ratiocination would be vain. If one proves absurdity,then one is no
longer speaking with him who erred but with him who is rational. But then
the disclosure of the absurdity (deductio ad absurdum) is not necessary.
One can also call a stupid error one that nothing, not even illusion, serves 57
to excuse; just as a crude error is an error that proves ignorance in common
cognition or a slip in common attentiveness.
Error in principles is greater than in their application.
An external mark or an external touchstone of truth is the comparison of
our own judgments with those of others, because the subjective will not be
present in all others in the same way, so that illusion can thereby be
cleared up. The incompatibility of the judgments of others with our own is
thus an external mark of error and is to be regarded as a cue to investigate
our procedure in judgment, but not for that reason to reject it at once. For
one can perhaps be right about the thingbut not right in manner,i.e., in the
exposition.
The common human understanding (sensus communis) is also in itself a
touchstone for discovering the mistakes of the artificial use of the understanding. This is what it means to orient oneself in thought or in the
speculative use of reason by means of the common understanding, when
one uses the common understanding as a test for passing judgment on the
correctness of the speculative use.
Universal rules and conditions for avoiding error in general are: i) to
think for oneself, 2) to think oneself in the position of someone else, and
3) always to think in agreement with oneself. The maxim of thinking for
563
oneself can be called the enlightened mode of thought; the maxim of putting
oneself in the viewpoint of others in thought, the extended mode of thought;
and the maxim of always thinking in agreement with one self, the consequent9 or coherent' mode of thought.
58 VIII.
C) Logical perfection of cognition as to quality — Clarity — Concept of
a mark in general - Various kinds of marks —Determination of the
logical essence of a thing —Its distinction from the real essence —
Distinctness, a higher degree of clarity -Aesthetic and logical
distinäness —Distinction between analytic and synthetic distinctness
From the side of the understanding, human cognition is discursive, i.e., it
takes place through representations which take as the ground of cognition
that which is common to many things, hence through marks' as such. Thus
we cognize things through marks and that is called cognizing,' [the German
word for which] comes from [the German word for] being acquainted."
A mark is that in a thing which constitutes apart of the cognition of it, or -
what is the same - a partial representation, insofar as it is considered as
ground of cognition of the whole representation. All our concepts are marks,
accordingly, and all thought is nothing other than a representing through
marks.
Every mark may be considered from two sides:
First, as a representation in itself;
Second, as belonging, as a partial concept, to the whole representation of
a thing, and thereby as ground of cognition of this thing itself.
All marks, considered as grounds of cognition, have two uses, either an
internal or an external use. The internal use consists in derivation, in order
to cognize the thing itself through marks as its grounds of cognition. The
external use consists in comparison, insofar as we can compare one thing
with others through marks in accordance with the rules of identity or
diversity.
There are many specific differences among marks, on which the following
classification of them is grounded.
"consequente."
"Merkmale."
"Erkennen."
"Kennen."
564
1. Analytic or synthetic marks. Theforme r are partial concepts of my actual concept 59
(marks that I already think therein), while the latter are partial conceptsof the
merely possible complete concept (which is supposed to come to be through a
synthesis of several parts). The former are all concepts of reason, the latter can
be concepts of experience.
2. Coordinate or subordinate. This division of marks concerns their connection
after" or under" one another.
Marks are coordinate insofar as each of them is represented as an immediate mark of the thing and are subordinate insofar as one mark is represented in the thing only by means of the other. The combination of
coordinate marks to form the whole of a concept is called an aggregate, the
combination of subordinate concepts a series. The former, the aggregation
of coordinate marks, constitutes the totality of the concept, which, in
regard to synthetic empirical concepts, can never be completed, but rather
resembles a straight line without limits.
The series of subordinate marks terminates a pane ante, or on the side
of the grounds, in concepts which cannot be broken up, which cannot be
further analyzed on account of their simplicity; apane post, or in regard to
the consequences, it is infinite, because we have a highest genus but no
lowest species.
With the synthesis of every new concept in the aggregation of coordinate marks, the extensive or extended distinctness grows, as intensive or deep
distinctness grows with the further analysis of the concept in the series of
subordinate marks. This latter kind of distinctness, since it necessarily
contributes to thoroughness and coherence of the cognition, is thus principally a matter of philosophy and is pursued to the highest degree in
metaphysical investigations in particular.
3. Affirmative or negative marks. Through the former we cognize what the thing
is, through the latter what it isnot.
Negative marks serve to keep us from errors. Hence they are unnecessary where it is impossible to err,and are necessary and of importance only in
those cases where they keep us from an important error into which we can
easily fall. Thus in regard to the concept, e.g., of a being like God,negative
marks are quite necessary and important.
Through affirmative marks we seek to understand something, through 60
negative marks - into which all marks canbe transformed- weonly seek
not to misunderstand or not to err, even if we should not thereby become
acquainted with anything.
4. Important and fruitful, or empty and unimportant, marks.
"nach."
"unter."
565
A mark is important and fruitful if it is a ground of cognition for great
and numerous consequences, partly in regard to its internal use, its use in
derivation, insofar as it is sufficient for cognizing thereby a great deal in
the thing itself, partly in respect to its external use, its use in comparison,
insofar as it thereby contributes to cognizing both the similarity of a thing
to many others and its difference from many others.
We have to distinguish logical importance and fruitfulness from practical,
from usefulness and utility, by the way.
5. Sufficienf and necessary or insufficient and accidental marks.
A mark is sufficient insofar as it suffices always to distinguish the thing
from all others; otherwise it is insufficient, as the mark of barking is, for
example, for dogs. The sufficiency^ of marks, as well as their importance,
is to be determined only in a relative sense, in relation to ends that are
intended through a cognition.
Necessary marks, finally, are those that must always be there to be found
in the thing represented. Marks of this sort are also called essential and are
opposed to extra-essential and accidental marks, which can be separated
from the concept of the thing.
Among necessary marks there is another distinction, however.
Some of them belong to the thing as grounds of other marks of one and
the same thing, while others belong only as consequences of other marks.
The former are primitive and constitutive marks (constitutiva, essentialia in
61 sensu strictissimoz), the others are called attributes (consectaria, rationata")
and belong admittedly to the essence of the thing, but only insofar as they
must first be derived from its essential points, as the three angles follow
from the three sides in the concept of the triangle, for example.
Extra-essential marks are again of two kinds; they concern either internal
determinations of a thing (moat) or its external relations (relationes). Thus
the mark of learnedness signifies an inner determination of a man, but being
a master or a servant only an external relation.
The complex of all the essential parts of a thing, or the sufficiency of its
marks as to coordination or subordination, is the essence (complexus notarum
primitivarum, interne conceptui dato sufficientium; s. complexus notarum, conceptum aliquem primitive constituentiumb).
In this explanation, however, we must not think at all of the real or
* "Zureichende."
y "Hinlänglichkeit."
* things that are constitutive, things that are essential in the strictest sense.
" things that follow, things grounded.
* the complex of primitive marks internally sufficient for a given concept, or the complex of
marks that primitively constitute a certain concept.
566
natural essence of things, into which we are never able to have insight. For
since logic abstracts from all content of cognition, and consequently also
from the thing itself, in this science the talk can only be of the logical
essence of things. And into this we can easily have insight. For it includes
nothing further than the cognition of all the predicates in regard to which
an object is determined through its concept; whereas for the real essence of
the thing (esse ret) we require cognition of those predicates on which, as
grounds of cognition, everything that belongs to the existence of the thing
depends. If we wish to determine, e.g., the logical essence of body, then
we do not necessarily have to seek for the data for this in nature; we may
direct our reflection to the marks which, as essential points (constitutiva,
rationes) originally constitute the basic concept of the thing. For the logical
essence is nothing but the first basic concept of all the necessary marks of a
thing (esse conceptus).
The first stage of the perfection of our cognition as to quality is thus its
clarity. A second stage, or a higher degree of clarity, is distinctness. This 62
consists in clarity of marks.
First of all we must here distinguish logical distinctness in general from
aesthetic distinctness. Logical distinctness rests on objective clarity of
marks, aesthetic distinctness on subjective clarity. The former is a clarity
through concepts, the latter a clarity through intuition. The latter kind of
distinctness consists, then, in a mere liveliness and understandability, i.e., in
a mere clarity through examples in concreto (for much that is not distinct
can still be understandable, and conversely, much that is hard to understand can still be distinct, because it goes back to remote marks, whose
connection with intuition is possible only through a long series).
Objective distinctness frequently causes subjective obscurity, and conversely. Hence logical distinctness is often possible only to the detriment of aesthetic distinctness, and conversely aesthetic distinctness
through examples and similarities which do not fit exactly but are only
taken according to an analogy often becomes harmful to logical distinctness. Besides, examples are simply not marks and do not belong to the
concept as parts but, as intuitions, to the use of the concept. Distinctness through examples, mere understandability, is hence of a completely different kind than distinctness through concepts as marks.
Lucidity consists in the combination of both, of aesthetic or popular
distinctness and of scholastic or logical distinctness. For one thinks of a
lucid mind as the talent for a luminous presentation of abstract and
thorough cognitions that is congruent with the common understanding's
power of comprehension.
Next, as for what concerns logical distinctness in particular, it is to be
called complete distinctness insofar as all the marks which, taken together,
567I M M A N U E L KANT
make up the whole concept have come to clarity. A completely' distinct
concept can be so, again, either in regard to the totality of its coordinate
marks or in respect to the totality of its subordinate marks. Extensively
complete or sufficient distinctness of a concept consists in the total clarity
of its coordinate marks, which is also called exhaustiveness. Total clarity of
subordinate marks constitutes intensively complete distinctness, profundity.
63 The former kind of logical distinctness can also be called the external
completeness (completudo externd) of the clarity of marks, the other the internal completeness (completudo internet). The latter can be attained only with
pure concepts of reason and with arbitrary concepts, but not with empirical concepts.
The extensive quantity of distinctness, insofar as it is not superfluous/ is
called precision/ Exhaustiveness^ (completudo) and precision (praecisio) together constitute adequacy1 (cognitio, quae rem adaequath); and the completed
perfection of a cognition (consummata cognitionis perfectio) consists (as to quality) in intensively adequate cognition, profundity, combined with extensively
adequate cognition, exhaustiveness and precision.
Since, as we have noted, it is the business of logic to make clear concepts
distinct, the question now is in what way it makes them distinct.
Logicians of the Wolffian school place the act of making cognitions
distinct' entirely in mere analysis of them. But not all distinctness rests on
analysis of a given concept. It arises thereby only in regard to those marks
that we already thought in the concept, but not in respect to those marks
that are first added to the concept as parts of the whole possible concept.
The kind of distinctness that arises not through analysis but through
synthesis of marks is synthetic distinctness. And thus there is an essential
difference between the two propositions: to make a distinct concept and to
make a concept distinct.
For when I make a distinct concept, I begin with the parts and proceed
from these toward the whole. Here there are no marks as yet at hand; I
acquire them only through synthesis. From this synthetic procedure
emerges synthetic distinctness, then, which actually extends my concept
as to content through what is added as a mark beyond' the concept in (pure
' "'vollständig oder complet."
d "abundant."
' "Pracision (Abgemessenheit)."
^ "Ausführlichkeit."
* "Angemessenheit."
* cognition that is adequate to the thing.
' "alle Deutlichmachung der Erkentnisse."
' "über."
568
or empirical) intuition. The mathematician and the natural philosopher
make use of this synthetic procedure in making distinctness in concepts.* 64
For all distinctness of properly mathematical cognition, as of all cognition
based on experience, rests on such an expansion of it through the synthesis of marks.
When I make a concept distinct, however, my cognition does not grow
at all as to content through this mere analysis. The content remains the
same, only the form is altered, in that I learn to distinguish better, or to
cognize with clearer consciousness, what lay in the given concept already.
As nothing is added to a map through the mere illumination' of it, so a
given concept is not in the least increased through its mere illumination'"
by means of the analysis of its marks.
To synthesis pertains the making distinct of objects," to analysis the
making distinct of concepts." In the latter case the whole precedes the parts, in
the former the parts precede the whole. The philosopher only makes given
concepts distinct. Sometimes one proceeds synthetically even when the
concept that one wants to make distinct in this wayis already given.This is
often the case with propositions based on experience, in case one is not
yet satisfied with the marks already thought in a given concept.
The analytic procedure for creating distinctness, with which alone logic
can occupy itself, is the first and principal requirement in making our
cognition distinct. For the more distinct our cognition of a thing is, the
stronger and more effective it can be too. But analysis must not go so far
that in the end the object itself disappears.
If we were conscious of all that we know, we would have to be astonished at the great multitude of our cognitions.
In regard to the objective content of our cognition in general, we may
think the following degrees, in accordance with which cognition can, in this
respect, be graded:
The first degree of cognition is: to represent something;'1
The second: to represent something with consciousness, or to perceive*
(percipere);
The third: to be acquainted' with something (noscere), or to represent 65
"Deutlichmachung der Begriffe."
"Illumination."
"Aufhellung."
"Deutlichmachung der Objeae."
"Deutlichmachung der Begriffe."
"sich etwas vorstellen."
"'wahrnehmen."
"kennen."
569
something in comparison with other things, both as to sameness1 and as to
difference;'
The fourth: to be acquainted with something with consciousness, i.e., to
cognize" it (cognoscere). Animals are acquainted with objects too, but they do
not cognize them.
The fifth: to understand11 something (intelligere), i.e., to cognize something through the understanding by means of concepts, or to conceive." One can
conceive* much, although one cannot comprehend-' it, e.g., a perpetuum
mobile, whose impossibility is shown in mechanics.
The sixth: to cognize something through reason, or to have insighf into
it (perspicere). With few things do we get this far, and our cognitions
become fewer and fewer in number the more that we seek to perfect them
as to content.
The seventh, finally: to comprehend" something (comprehendere), i.e., to
cognize something through reason or a priori to the degree that is sufficient for our purpose. For all our comprehension is only relative, i.e.,
sufficient for a certain purpose; we do not comprehend anything without
qualification. Nothing can be comprehended more than what the mathematician demonstrates, e.g., that all lines in the circle are proportional.
And yet he does not comprehend how it happens that such a simple
figure has these properties. The field of understanding or of the understanding is thus in general much greater than the field of comprehension
or of reason.
IX.
D) Logical perfection of cognition as to modality certainty — Concept of
holding-to-be-true in general- Modi of holding-to-be-true:
opining, believing and knowing - Conviction and persuasion -
Reservation and deferral of a judgment —Provisionaljudgments —
Prejudices, their sources and principal kinds
Truth is an objective property of cognition; the judgment through which
66 something is represented as true, the relation to an understanding and thus
to a particular subject, is, subjectively, holding-to-be-true.b
'"Einerleiheit." '
"Verschiedenheit."
" "erkennen."
" "verstehen."
" "condpiren."
" "Concipiren."
* "begreifen."
* "einsehen."
° "begreifen."
* "Fiinvahrhalten."
570
Holding-to-be-true is in general of two kinds, certain or uncertain. Certain holding-to-be-true, or certainty, is combined with consciousness of
necessity, while uncertain holding-to-be-true, or uncertainty, is combined
with consciousness of the contingency or the possibility of the opposite.
The latter is again either subjectively as well as objectively insufficient, or
objectively insufficient but subjectively sufficient. The former is called opinion,'
the latter must be called belief.d
Accordingly, there are three kinds or modi of holding-to-be-true: opining' believing/ and knowing.1 Opining is problematic judging, believing is
assertoric judging, and knowing is apodeictic judging. For what I merely
opine I hold in judging,with consciousness, only to be problematic; what I
believe I hold to be assertoric, but not as objectively necessary, only as
subjectively so (holding only for me); what I know, finally, I hold to be
apodeiäically certain, i.e., to be universallyand objectively necessary (holding for all), even granted that the object to which this certain holding-tobe-true relates should be a merely empirical truth. For this distinction in
holding-to-be-true according to the three modi just named concerns only
the power of judgment in regard to the subjectivecriteria for subsumption of
a judgment under objective rules.
Thus, for example, our holding-to-be-true of immortality would be
merely problematic in case we only act as if we were immortal, but it would
be assertoric in case we believe that we are immortal, and it would be apodeictic,
finally, in case we all knew that there is another life after this one.
There is an essential difference, then, between opining, believing, and
knowing, which we wish to expound more exactly and in more detail here.
i. Opining. Opining, or holding-to-be-true based on a ground of cognition that is neither subjectively nor objectively sufficient, can be regarded
as provisional judging (sub conditione suspensiva ad interim) that one cannot
easily dispense with. One must first opine before one accepts and maintains, but in doing so must guard oneself against holding an opinion to be
something more than mere opinion. For the most part, we begin with
opining in all our cognizing. Sometimes we have an obscure premonition 67
of truth, a thing seems to us to contain marks of truth; we suspect its truth
even before we cognize it with determinate certainty.
But now where does mere opining really occur?Not in any sciences that
contain cognitions apriori,hence neither in mathematics nor in metaphysics nor in morals, but merely in empirical cognitions: in physics, psychology, etc. For it is absurd to opine a priori. In fact, too, nothing could be
more ridiculous than, e.g., only to opine in mathematics. Here, as in
' "Meinung."
d "Glaube."
'"Meinen."f
"Glauben."
1 "Wissen."
571
metaphysics and in morals, the rule is either to know or not to know. Thus
matters of opinion can only be objects of a cognition by experience, a
cognition which is possible in itself but impossible for us in accordance
with the restrictions and conditions of our faculty of experience and the
attendant degree of this faculty that we possess. Thus, for example, the
ether of modern physicists is a mere matter of opinion. For with this as
with every opinion in general, whatever it may be, I see that the opposite
could perhaps yet be proved. Thus my holding-to-be-true is here both
objectively and subjectively insufficient, although it can become complete,
considered in itself.
2. Believing. Believing, or holding-to-be-true based on a ground that is
objectively insufficient but subjectively sufficient, relates to objects in
regard to which we not only cannot know anything but also cannot opine
anything, indeed, cannot even pretend there is probability, but can only be
certain that it is not contradictory to think of such objects as one does
think of them. What remains here is a free holding-to-be-true, which is
necessary only in a practical respect given apriori, hence a holding-to-betrue of what I accept on moral grounds, and in such a way that I am certain
that the opposite can never be proved.*
* Believing is not a special source of cognition. It is a kind of incomplete holding-to-be-true
with consciousness, and if considered as restricted to a particular kind of object (which
pertains only to believing), it is distinguished from opining not by its degree but rather by the
relation that it has as cognition to action. Thus the businessman, for example, to strike a
68 deal, needs not just to opine that there will be something to be gained thereby, but to believe
it, i.e., to have his opinion be sufficient for an undertaking into the uncertain. Now we have
theoretical cognitions (of the sensible) in which we can come to certainty, and in regard to
everything that we can call human cognition this latter must be possible. We have just such
certain cognitions, and in fact completely a priori, in practical laws, but these are grounded
on a supersensible principle (of freedom) and in fact in us ourselves, as a principle of practical
reason. But this practical reason is a causality in regard to a likewise supersensible object, the
highest good, which is not possible through our faculty in the sensible world. Nature as object
of our theoretical reason must nonetheless agree with this, for the consequence or effect of this
idea is supposed to be met with in the world of the senses. Thus we ought to act so as to
make this end actual.
Now in the world of the senses we also find traces of an artistic misdom,h and we believe
that the cause of the world also works with moral wisdom toward the highest good. This is a
holding-to-be-true that is enough for action, i.e., a belief. Now we do not need this for action
in accordance with moral laws, for these are given through practical reason alone, but we
need to accept a highest wisdom as the object of our moral will, an object beyond the mere
legitimacy of our actions, toward which we cannot avoid directing our ends. Although
objectively this would not be a necessary relation of our faculty of choice, subjectively the
highest good is still necessarily the object of a good (even of a human) will, and hence belief
in its attainability is necessarily presupposed.
There is no mean between the acquisition of a cognition through experience (a posteriori)
and through reason (apriori). But there is a mean between the cognition of an object and the
mere presupposition of its possibility, namely, an empirical ground or a ground of reason for
'Kunstmeisheit."
572
Matters of belief are thus I) not objects of empirical cognition. Hence so- 68
called historical belief cannot really be called belief, either, and cannot be
opposed as such to knowledge, since it can itself be knowledge. Holdingto-be-true based on testimony is not distinguished from holding-to-betrue through one's own experience either as to degree or as to kind.
II) [N]or [are they] objects of cognition by reason (cognition a priori),
whether theoretical, e.g., in mathematics and metaphysics, or practical, in
morals.
One can believe mathematical truths of reason on testimony, to be sure,
partly because error here is not easily possible, partly, too, because it can
easily be discovered, but one cannot know them in this way,of course. But
accepting this possibility in relation to a necessary extension of the field of possible objects
beyond those whose cognition is possible for us. This necessity occurs only in regard to that
in which the object is cognized as practical and, through reason, as practically necessary, for
to accept something on behalf of the mere extension of theoretical cognition is always
contingent. This practically necessary presupposition of an object is the presupposition of the
possibility of the highest good as object of choice, hence also of the condition of this
possibility (God, freedom, and immortality). This is a subjective necessity to accept the
reality of the object for the sake of the necessary determination of the will. This is the casus
extravrdinarius, without which practical reason cannot maintain itself in regard to its necessary end, and here afavor necessitate proves useful to it in its own judgment. It cannot acquire
an object logically, but can only oppose what hinders it in the use of this idea, which belongs 69
to it practically.
This belief is the necessity to accept the objective reality of a concept (of the highest
good), i.e., the possibility of its object, asapriori necessary object of choice. If we look merely
to actions, we do not need this belief. But if we wish to extend ourselves through actions to
possession of the end that is thereby possible, then we must accept that this end is completely possible. Hence I can only say that / see myself necessitated through my end, in
accordance with laws of freedom, to accept as possible a highest good in the world, but I
cannot necessitate anyone else through grounds (the belief is free).
A belief of reason can never aim at theoretical cognition, then, for there objectively
insufficient holding-to-be-true is merely opinion. It is merely a presupposition of reason for
a subjective though absolutely necessary practical purpose. The sentiment toward moral
laws leads to an object of choice, which [choice] is determinable through pure reason. The
acceptance of the feasibility of this object, and hence of the reality of its cause, is a moral
belief, or a free holding-to-be-true that is necessary for moral purposes for completion of
one's ends.
Fides is really good faith1 in thepactum, or subjective trust-' in one another, that one will keep
his promise to the other, with full faith and credit.* The first when the pactum is made, the
second when it is to be concluded.
In accordance with the analogy, practical reason is, as it were, the promisor,' man the
promissee," the good expected from the deed the promised."
' "Treue."
' "subjectives Zutrauen."
* "Treue und Glauben."
' "der Prominent."
m "der Promissarius."
" "das Promissum."
573
philosophical truths of reason may not even be believed, they must simply
be known; for philosophy does not allow mere persuasion. And as for
what concerns in particular the objects of practical cognition by reason in
70 morals, rights and duties, there can just as little be mere belief in regard to
them. One must be fully certain whether something is right or wrong, in
accordance with duty or contrary to duty, allowed or not allowed. In moral
things one cannot risk anything on the uncertain, one cannot decideanything on the danger of trespass against the law. Thus it is not enough for the
judge, for example, that he merely believe that someone accused of a crime
actually committed this crime. He must know it (juridically), or he acts
unconscientiously.
Ill) The only objects that are matters of belief are those in which
holding-to-be-true is necessarily free, i.e., is not determined through
objective grounds of truth that are independent of the nature and the
interest of the subject.
Thus also on account of its merely subjective grounds, believing yields
no conviction that can be communicated and that commands universal
agreement, like the conviction that comes from knowledge. Only / myself
can be certain of the validity and unalterability of my practical belief, and
my belief in the truth of a proposition or the actuality of a thing is what
takes the place of a cognition only in relation to me without itself being a
cognition.
He who does not accept what it is impossible to know but morally necessary to presuppose is morally unbelieving. At the basis of this kind of
unbelief lies always a lack of moral interest. The greater a man's moral
sentiment," the firmer and more lively will be his belief in all that he feels
himself necessitated to accept and to presuppose out of moral interest, for
practically necessary purposes.
3. Knowing. Holding-to-be-true based on a ground of cognition that is
objectively as well as subjectively sufficient, or certainty, is either empirical
or rational, accordingly as it is grounded either on experience - one's own
as well as that communicated by others - or on reason. This distinction
relates, then, to the two sources from which the whole of our cognition is
drawn: experience and reason.
Rational certainty, again, is either mathematical or philosophical certainty. The former is intuitive/ the latter discursive.
Mathematical certainty is also called evidence," because an intuitive cog-
71 nition is clearer than a discursive one.Although the two, mathematical
and philosophical cognition of reason, are in themselves equally certain,
the certainty is different in kind in them.
' "moralische Gesinnung."
' "intuitiv."
f "Evidenz."
574
Empirical certainty is original (originarie empirica) insofar as I become
certain of something from my own experience, and derived (derivative empirica) insofar as I become certain through someone else's experience. The
latter is also usually called historical certainty.
Rational certainty is distinguished from empirical certainty by the consciousness of necessity that is combined with it; hence it is apodeictic certainty, while empirical certainty is only assertoric. We are rationally certain
of that into which we would have had insight a priori even without any
experience. Hence our cognitions can concern objects of experience and
the certainty concerning them can still be both empirical and rational at
the same time, namely, insofar as we cognize an empiricallycertain proposition from principles apriori.
We cannot have rational certainty of everything, but where we can have
it, we must put it before empirical certainty.
All certainty is either unmediated or mediated, i.e., it either requires a
proof, or it is not capable of and does not require any proof. Even if so
much in our cognition is certain only mediately, i.e., through a proof,
there must still be something indemonstrable or immediately certain, and the
whole of our cognition must proceed from immediately certain propositions.
The proofs on which any mediated or mediate certainty of a cognition rests are either direct proofs or indirect, i.e., apagogical ones.
When I prove a truth from its grounds I provide a direct proof for it,
and when I infer the truth of a proposition from the falsehood of its
opposite I provide an indirect one. If this latter is to have validity,
however, the propositions must be opposed contradictorily or diametraliter. For two propositions opposed only as contraries (contrarie opposita) can both be false. A proof that is the ground of mathematical
certainty is called a demonstration, and that which is the ground of philosophical certainty is called an acroamatic proof. The essential parts of
any proof in general are its matter and its form, or the ground of proof
and the consequentia.
From [the German word for] knowing' comes [the German word for] 72
science,5 by which is to be understood the complex of a cognition as a
system. It is opposed to common cognition, i.e., to the complex of a cognition as mere aggregate. A system rests on an idea of the whole, which
precedes the parts, while with common cognition on the other hand, or a
mere aggregate of cognitions, the parts precede the whole. There are
historical sciences and sciences of reason.
In a science we often know only the cognitions but not the things repre-
" Wissen."
"Wissenschaft."
575
sented through them; hence there can be a science of that of which our
cognition is not knowledge.
From the foregoing observations concerning the nature and the kinds of
holding-to-be-true we can now draw the universal result that all our
conviction is thus either logical or practical. When we know, namely, that
we are free of all subjective grounds and yet the holding-to-be-true is
sufficient, then we are convinced, and in fact logically convinced, or convinced on objective grounds (the object is certain).
Complete holding-to-be-true on subjective grounds, which in apractical relation hold just as much as objective grounds, is also conviction,
though not logical but rather praäical conviction (/ am certain). And this
practical conviction, or this moral belief of reason,' is often firmer than all
knowledge. With knowledge one still listens to opposed grounds, but not
with belief, because here it does not depend on objective grounds but on
the moral interest of the subject.*
73 Opposed to conviction stands persuasion, a holding-to-be-true on insufficient grounds, of which one does not know whether they are merely
subjective or also objective.
Persuasion often precedes conviction. We are conscious of many cognitions only in such a way that we cannot judge whether the grounds of our
holding-to-be-true are objective or subjective. To be able to pass from
mere persuasion to conviction, then, we must first of all reflect, i.e., see to
which power of cognition a cognition belongs, and then investigate, i.e.,
test whether the grounds are sufficient or insufficient in regard to the
object. Many remain with persuasion. Some come to reflection, few to
investigation. He who knows what pertains to certainty will not easily mix
up persuasion and conviction, and hence will not let himself be easily
* This practical conviction is thus moral belief of reason," which alone can be called a belief in
the proper sense and be opposed as such to knowledge and to all theoretical or logical
conviction in general, because it can never elevate itself to knowledge. So-called historical
belief, on the other hand, as already observed, may not be distinguished from knowledge,
since as a kind of theoretical or logical holding-to-be-true it can itself be knowledge. We can
accept an empirical truth on the testimony of others with the same certainty as if we had
attained it through facta of our own experience. In the former kind of empirical knowledge
there is something deceptive, but also with the latter kind.
Historical or mediate empirical knowledge rests on die reliability of testimony. The
requirements of an irrefutable witness include authenticity* (competence") and integrity.'
' "moralische Vernunftglaube."
* "der moralische Vemunfiglaube."
*' "Authentizität."
" "Tüchtigkeit."
* "Integrität."
576
persuaded, either. There is a ground of determination to approval, which
is composed of objective and subjective grounds, and most men do not
analyze^ this mixed effect.
Although all persuasion is false as to form (formaliter), namely, insofar
as an uncertain cognition appears here to be certain, it can nonetheless be
true as to matter (materialiter). And thus it is distinct from opinion, too,
which is an uncertain cognition, insofar as it is held to be uncertain.
The sufficiency of holding-to-be-true (in belief) can be put to the test
by betting and by taking oaths. For the first comparative sufficiency of objective grounds is necessary, for the second absolute sufficiency, instead of
which, if this is not available, a merely subjectively sufficient holding-tobe-true nevertheless holds.
It is customary to use the expressions, to agree with someone's judgment, to
reserve, to defer, or give up one's judgment. These and similar expressions
seem to indicate that there is something arbitrary2 in our judging, in that
we hold something to be true because we want to hold it to be true. The
question arises, accordingly, whether willing has an influence on our judgments.
The will does not have any influence immediately on holding-to-betrue; this would be quite absurd. When it is said that wegladly believe what 74
we wish, this means only our benign wishes, e.g., those of a father for his
children. If the will had an immediate influence on our conviction concerning what we wish, we would constantly form for ourselves chimeras of a
happy condition, and always hold them to be true, too. But the will cannot
struggle against convincing proofs of truths that are contrary to its wishes
and inclinations.
Insofar as the will either impels the understanding toward inquiry into a
truth or holds it back therefrom, however, one must grant it an influence
on the use of the understanding, and hence mediately on conviction itself,
since this depends so much upon the use of the understanding.
As for what concerns in particular the deferral or reservation of our
judgment, however, this consists in the resolution not to let a merely
provisional judgment become determining. A provisional judgment is one in
which I represent that while there are more grounds for the truth of a
thing than against it, these grounds still do not suffice for a determining or
definitive judgment, through which I simply decide for the truth. Provisional judging is thus merely problematic judgingwith consciousness.
Reservation of judgment can happen for two purposes: either in order to
seek for the grounds of the determining judgment, or in order never to
31 "setzen . . . nicht aus einander."
z "etwas Willkürliches."
577
judge. In the former case the deferral of judgment is called critical
(suspensio judicii indagatoria), in the hiter skeptical (suspensiojudiciisceptica).
For the skeptic refrains from all judgment, while the true philosopher
merely suspends his judgment in case he does not yet have sufficient
grounds for holding something to be true.
To suspend one's judgment in accordance with maxims requires a practiced faculty of judgment, which is found only in advancing age. In general, reservation of our approval is a very hard thing, partly because our
understanding is so desirous of expanding itself and enriching itself with
cognitions" by judging, partly because our inclination is always directed
more toward certain things than toward others. He who has often had to
retract his approval, however, and who has thereby become smart and
75 cautious, will not give it so quickly, out of fear of having subsequently to
retract his judgment again. This revocation is always mortifying and causes
one to mistrust all other cognitions.*
We observe here further that leaving one's judgment in dubio is something different from leaving it in suspense. In the latter case I always have
an interest in the thing, in the former it is not always in conformity with
my end and interest to decide whether the thing is true or not.
Provisional judgments are quite necessary, indeed, indispensable, for
the use of the understanding in all meditation and investigation. For they
serve to guide the understanding in its inquiries and to provide it with
various means thereto.
When we meditate concerning an object, we must always judge provisionally and, as it were, get the scent of the cognition that is partly to come
to us through the meditation. And when we go after inventions or discoveries, we must always make a provisional plan, otherwise our thoughts go on
at random. We can think of provisional judgments, therefore, as maxims
for the investigation of a thing. We could also call them anticipations,
because we anticipate our judgment of a thing even before we have the
determining judgment. Judgments of this sort have their good use, then,
and rules can even be given for how we ought to judge provisionally
concerning an object.
Prejudices must be distinguished from provisional judgments.
Prejudices are provisional judgments insofar as they are accepted asprinciples. Every prejudice is to be regarded as a principle of erroneous judgments, and from prejudices arise not prejudices, but rather erroneous
judgments. Hence one must distinguish the false cognition that arises
from prejudice from its source, the prejudice itself. Thus the interpreta-
" "Kenntnissen."
* "Kenntnisse."
578
tion of dreams, for example, is not in itself a prejudice, but rather an error,
which arises from the assumed universal rule that what happens a few
times happens always, or is always to be held to be true. And this principle, under which the interpretation of dreams belongs, is a prejudice.
Sometimes prejudices are true provisional judgments; what is wrong is
only that they hold for us as principles or as determining judgments. The 76
cause of this deception is to be sought in the fact that subjective grounds
are falsely held to be objective, due to a lack of reflection, which must
precede all judging. For even if we can accept some cognitions, e.g.,
immediately certain propositions, without investigating them, i.e., without
examining the conditions of their truth, we still cannot and may not judge
concerning anything without reflecting, i.e., without comparing a cognition
with the power of cognition from which it is supposed to arise (sensibility
or the understanding). If we accept judgments without this reflection,
which is necessary even where no investigation occurs, then from this
prejudices arise, or principles for judging based on subjective causes that
are falsely held to be objective grounds.
The principal sources of prejudices are: imitation, custom, and inclination.
Imitation has a universal influence on our judgments, for there is a
strong ground for holding to be true what others have put forth as true.
Hence the prejudice that what the whole world does is right. As for what
concerns prejudices that have arisen from custom, they can only be rooted
out in the course of time, as the understanding, having little by little been
held up and slowed down in judging by opposing grounds, is thereby
gradually brought to an opposite mode of thought. If a prejudice of custom has arisen at the same time from imitation, however, then the man
who possesses it is very hard to cure. The inclination toward passive useof
reason, or toward the mechanism of reason rather than toward its spontaneity
under laws, can also be called a prejudice of imitation.
Reason is an active principle, to be sure, which ought not to derive
anything from the mere authority of others, nor even, when its pure use is
concerned, from experience. But the indolence of many men is such that
they prefer to follow in the footsteps of others rather than strain their own
powers of understanding. Men of this sort can only be copies of others,
and if everyone were of this kind, the world would remain eternally in one
and the same place. Hence it is most necessary and important not to
confine youths to mere imitation, as customarily happens.
There are so many things that contribute to accustoming us to the
maxim of imitation, and thereby to making reason a fruitful ground of 77
prejudices. Such aids to imitation include:
i. Formulas.0 These are rules whose expression serves as a model for imitation.
They are uncommonly useful, by the way, for making complicated proposi-
' "Formeln."
579
tions easier, and the most enlightened mind therefore seeks to discover such
things.
Sayings, whose expression has the great precision of pregnant meaning, so
that it seems one could not capture the sense with fewer words. Pronouncements of this sort (dicta\), which must always be borrowed from others whom
one trusts to have a certain infallibility, serve, on account of this authority, as
rules and as laws. The pronouncements of the bible are called sayings xat'
Sentences/ i.e., propositions which recommend themselves and which,
through the force of the thoughts lying within them, often retain their prestige
through centuries as products of a mature power of judgment.
Canones. These are universal rules1 that serve as foundations for die sciences
and indicate something sublime and thought through. One can express them
in a sententious way, too, so that they are the more pleasing.
Proverbs (proverbia). These are popular rules of the common understanding,
or expressions for signifying its popular judgments. Since provincial propositions of this sort serve only the common crowd as sentences and canons, tiiey
are not to be found among people of finer upbringing.
From the three universal sources of prejudices stated above, and from
imitation in particular, many particular prejudices arise, among which we
wish to touch here upon the following as the most common,
i. Prejudices of prestige. Among these are to be reckoned:
a) The prejudice of the prestige of the person. If, in things that rest on
experience and on testimony, we build our cognition on the prestige of
other persons, we are not thereby guilty of any prejudice; for in matters of
78 this kind, since we cannot experience everything ourselves and comprehend it with our own understanding, the prestige of the person must be
the foundation of our judgments. When we make the prestige of others
the ground of our holding-to-be-true in respect of cognitions of reason,
however, we accept these cognitions merely on the basis of prejudice. For
truths of reason hold anonymously; the question here is not, Who said it?
but rather, What did he say? It does not matter at all whether a cognition is
of noble descent; but the inclination toward the prestige of great men is
nonetheless very common, partly because of the restrictedness of our own
insight, partly due to a desire to imitate what is described to us as great.
Added to this is the fact that the prestige of the person serves to flatter our
vanity in an indirect way. Just as the subjects of a powerful despot are
proud of the fact that they are all just treated equally by him, since to this
* "Sprüche."
' parexcellence.
1 "Sentenzen"
g "Lehrsprüche."
* "Sprüchwörter."
580
extent the least can fancy himself the equal of the foremost, as they are
both nothing over against the unrestricted power of their ruler, so too do
the admirers of a great man judge themselves to be equal, insofar as the
superiorities that they may have compared to one another are to be regarded as insignificant when considered against the merit of the great
man. For more than one reason, therefore, highly prized great men contribute not a little to the inclination toward the prejudice of the prestige of
the person.
b) The prejudice of the prestige of the multitude. It is principally the crowd
who are inclined to this prejudice. For since they are unable to pass
judgment on the merits, the capabilities, and the cognitions' of the person,
they hold rather to the judgment of the multitude, under the presupposition that what everyone says must surely be true. This prejudice among
the vulgar relates only to historical matters, however; in matters of religion, where they are themselves interested, they rely on the judgment of
the learned.
It is in general noteworthy that the ignorant man has a prejudice for
learnedness, while the learned man, on the other hand, has a prejudice for
the common understanding.
If, after a learned man has nearly run the course of the sciences, he
does not procure appropriate satisfaction from all his efforts, he finally
acquires a mistrust of learnedness, especially in regard to those specula- 79
tions where the concepts cannot be made sensible, and whose foundations
are unsettled, as, e.g., in metaphysics. Since he still believes, however, that
it must be possible to find the key to certainty concerning certain objects
somewhere, he seeks it now in the common understanding, after he had
sought it so long in vain on the path of scientific inquiry.
But this hope is quite deceptive, for if the cultivated faculty of reason
can accomplish nothing in respect to the cognition of certain things, the
uncultivated faculty will certainly do so just as little. In metaphysics the
appeal to pronouncements of the common understanding is completely
inadmissible, because here no case can be exhibited in concreto. With
morals, however, the situation is admittedly different. Not only can all
rules in morals be given in concreto, but practical reason even manifests
itself in general more clearly and more correctly through the organ of the
common use of the understanding than through that of its speculative use.
Hence the common understanding often judges more correctly concerning matters of morality and duty than does the speculative.
c) The prejudice of the prestige of the age. Here the prejudice of antiquity is
one of the most significant.We do have reason to judge kindlyofantiquity,
to be sure, but that is only a ground for moderate respect, whose limits we
all too often overstep by treating the ancients as treasurers of cognitions
1 "Kenntnisse."
581
and of sciences, elevating the relative worth of their writings to an absolute
one and trusting blindly to their guidance. To esteem the ancients so
excessively is to lead the understanding back into its childhood and to
neglect the use of one's own talent. We would also err greatly if we
believed that everyone in antiquity had written as classically as those
whose writings have come down to us. For since time sifts everything and
preserves only what has an inner worth, we may assume, not without
reason, that we only possess the best writings of the ancients.
There are several causes by which the prejudice of antiquity is created
and sustained.
80 If something exceeds expectation as a universal rule, one initially wonders at this, and this wonder then often turns to admiration. This is the
case with the ancients when one finds something in them that, in respect
of the circumstances of time in which they lived, one did not seek. Another cause lies in the circumstance that acquaintance with the ancients
and with antiquity proves learnedness and wide reading, which always
brings respect, however common and insignificant in themselves the
things may be that one has drawn from the study of the ancients. A third
cause is the gratitude we owe to the ancients for the fact that they blazed
the path toward many cognitions.-' It seems fair to show them special
esteem, whose measure we often overstep, however. A fourth cause, finally, is to be sought in a certain envy toward our contemporaries. He who
cannot contend with the moderns extols the ancients at their expense, so
that the moderns cannot raise themselves above him.
The opposite of this is the prejudice of modernity. Sometimes the prestige of antiquity and the prejudice in its favor declined, particularly at the
beginning of this century, when the famous Fontenelle1? took the side of
the moderns. In the case of cognitions that are capable of extension, it is
quite natural that we place more trust in the moderns than in the ancients.
But this judgment has ground only as a mere provisional judgment. If we
make it a determining one, it becomes a prejudice.
2. Prejudices based on self-love or logical egoism, in accordance with which
one holds the agreement of one's own judgment with the judgments of
others to be a dispensable criterion of truth. They are opposed to the
prejudices of prestige, since they express themselves in a certain preference for that which is the product of one's own understanding, e.g., one's
own system.
Is it good and advisable to let prejudices stand or even to encourage them?It
81 is astonishing that in our age such questions can still be advanced, especially that concerning the encouragement of prejudices. Encouragingsome-
' "Kenntnissen."
582
one's prejudices amounts to deceiving someone with good intent. It would
be permissible to leave prejudices untouched, for who can occupy himself
with exposing and getting rid of every prejudice? But it is another question
whether it would not be advisable to work toward rooting them out with all
one's powers. Old and rooted prejudices are admittedly hard to battle,
because they justify themselves and are, as it were, their own judges.People
also seek to excuse letting prejudices stand on the ground that disadvantages would arise from rooting them out. But let us always accept these
disadvantages; they will subsequently bring all the more good.
X.
Probability - Explanation of theprobable —Distinction between
probability and plausibility - Mathematical and philosophical
probability —Doubt —Subjective and objective doubt - Skeptical,
dogmatic, and critical mode of thought or method of philosophizing -
Hypotheses
To the doctrine concerning the certainty of our cognition pertains also the
doctrine of the cognition of the probable, which is to be regarded as an
approximation to certainty.
By probabilityis to be understood a holding-to-be-true based on insufficient grounds which have, however, a greater relation to the sufficient
grounds than do the grounds of the opposite. By this explanation we
distinguish probability*(probabilitas) from mere plausibility' (verisimilitude),
a holding-to-be-true based on insufficient grounds insofar as these are
greater than the grounds of the opposite.
The ground of holding-to-be-true, that is, can be either objectively or
subjectively greater than that of the opposite. Which of the two it is one can
only discover by comparing the grounds of the holding-to-be-true with
the sufficient grounds; for then the grounds of the holding-to-be-true are
greater than the grounds of the opposite canbe.With probability, then, the 82
ground of the holding-to-be-true is objeäively valid, while with mere plausibility it is only subjectively valid. Plausibility is merely quantity of persuasion, probability is an approximation to certainty. With probability there
must always exist a standard in accordance with which I can estimate it.
This standard is certainty. For since I am supposed to compare the insufficient grounds with the sufficient ones, I must know how much pertains to
certainty. Such a standard is lacking, however, with mere plausibility,
since here I do not compare the insufficient grounds with the sufficient
ones, but only with the grounds of the opposite.
* "Wahrscheinlichkeit."
' "Scheinbarkeit."
583
The moments of probability can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous.
If diey are homogeneous, as in mathematical cognition, then they must be
enumerated;1" if they are heterogeneous, as in philosophical" cognition,
then they must be weighed," i.e., evaluated according to their effect, and
this according to the overpowering of obstacles in the mind. The latter
give no relation to certainty, but only a relation of one plausibility to
another. From this it follows that only the mathematician can determine
the relation of insufficient grounds to the sufficient ground; the philosopher must content himself with plausibility, a holding-to-be-true that is
sufficient merely subjectively and practically. For in philosophical cognition probability cannot be estimated, on account of the heterogeneity of
the grounds; here the weights are not all stamped, so to speak. Hence it is
only of mathematical probability that one can really say that it is more than
half of certainty.
There has been much talk of a logic of probability (logica probabilium).
But this is not possible; for if the relation of the insufficient grounds to the
sufficient ground cannot be weighed mathematically, then rules do not
help at all.Also, one cannot give any universal rules of probability, except
that error will not occur on oneside, but there must rather be a ground of
agreement in the object; likewise, that when there are as many errors, and
errors in equal degree, on two opposed sides, the truth is in the middle.
83 Doubt is an opposing ground or a mere obstacle to holding-to-be-true,
which can be considered either subjeäively or objectively. Doubt is sometimes taken subjeäively, namely, as a condition of an undecided mind, and
objectively as cognition of the insufficiency of the grounds for holding-tobe-true. In the latter respect it is called an objection, that is, an objective
ground for holding to be false a cognition that is held to be true.
A scruple is a ground opposed to holding-to-be-true that is merely
subjectively valid. In the case of a scruple one does not know whether the
obstacle to holding-to-be-true is grounded objectively or only subjectively, e.g., only in inclination, in custom, etc. One doubts without being
able to explain the ground of the doubt distinctly and determinately and
without being able to have insight into whether this ground lies in the
object itself or only in the subject. Now if it is to be possible to remove
such scruples, then they must be raised to the distinctness and determinateness of an objection. For it is through objections that certainty is
brought to distinctness and completeness, and no one can be certain of a
thing unless opposing grounds have been stirred up, through which it can
"numerirt."
Ak, "philosophischen"; ist ed., "philosophischen."
"ponderirt."
584
be determined how far one still is from certainty or how close' one is to it.
Also, it is not enough merely to answer each doubt, one must also resolve
it, that is, make comprehensible how the scruple has arisen. If this does
not happen, the doubt is only turned back, but not removed, the seed of the
doubt still remains. In many cases, of course, we do not know whether the
obstacle to holding-to-be-true has only subjective grounds in us or objective ones, and hence we cannot remove the scruple by exposing the illusion, since we cannot always compare our cognitions with the object but
often only with each other. It is therefore modesty to expound one's
objections only as doubts.
There is a principle of doubting which consists in the maxim that cognitions are to be treated with the intention of making them uncertain and
showing the impossibility of attaining certainty. This method of philosophizing is the skeptical mode of thought, or skepticism. It is opposed to the
dogmatic mode of thought, or dogmatism, which is a blind trust in the 84
faculty of reason to expand itself a priori through mere concepts, without
critique, merely on account of seeming success.
Both methods are mistaken if they become universal. For there are
many cognitions* in regard to which we cannot proceed dogmatically, and
on the other side skepticism, by renouncing all assertoric cognition/ ruins
all our efforts at attaining possession of a cognition of the certain.
As harmful as this skepticism is, though, the skeptical method is just as
useful and purposeful, provided one understands nothing more by this
than the way of treating something as uncertain and of bringing it to the
highest uncertainty, in the hope of getting on the trail of truth in this way.
This method is thus really a mere suspension of judging. It is quite useful
to the critical procedure, by which is to be understood that method of
philosophizing in accordance with which one investigates the sources of his
claims or objections and the grounds on which these rest, a method which
gives hope of attaining certainty.
In mathematics and physics skepticism does not occur. The only cognition that can occasion it is that which is neither mathematical nor empirical, purely philosophical cognition. Absolute skepticism pronounces everything to be illusion. Hence it distinguishes illusion from truth and must
therefore have a mark of the distinction after all, and consequently must
presuppose a cognition of truth, whereby it contradicts itself.
p Reading "wie nahe man" for "wie nahe man noch," with Hinske (KI, xlii).
* "Kenntnisse."
' "behauptende Erkenntniß."
585
Concerning probability, we observed above that it is merely an approximation to certainty. Now this is especially the case with hypotheses, through
which we can never attain apodeictic certainty in our cognition, but always
only a greater or lesser degree ofprobability.
A hypothesis is a holding-to-be-true of thejudgment of the truth of a ground
for the sake of its sufficiency for given consequences,^ or more briefly, the
holding-to-be-true of a presupposition as a ground.
85 All holding-to-be-true in hypotheses is thus grounded on the fact that
the presupposition, as ground, is sufficient to explain other cognitions as
consequences. For we infer here from the truth of the consequence to the
truth of the ground. But since this mode of inference, as already observed
above, yields a sufficient criterion of truth and can lead to apodeictic
certainty only when all possible consequences of an assumed ground are
true, it is clear from this that since we can never determine all possible
consequences, hypotheses always remain hypotheses, that is, presuppositions, whose complete certainty we can never attain. In spite of this, the
probability of a hypothesis can grow and rise to an analogue of certainty,
namely, when all the consequences that have as yet occurred to us can be
explained from the presupposed ground. For in such a case there is no
reason why we should not assume that we will be able to explain all
possible consequences thereby. Hence in this case we give ourselves over
to the hypothesis as if it were fully certain, although it is so only through
induction.
And in every hypothesis something must be apodeictically certain, too,
namely,
1. the possibility of the presupposition itself. If, for example, to explain
earthquakes and volcanoes we assume a subterranean fire, then such a
fire must be possible, if not as a flaming body, yet as a hot one. For the
sake of certain other appearances, however, to make the earth out to be an
animal, in which the circulation of the inner fluids produces warmth, is to
put forth a mere invention and not a hypothesis. For realities may be made
up, but not possibilities; these must be certain.
2. The consequentia. From the assumed ground the consequences
must flow correctly; otherwise the hypothesis becomes a mere chimera.
3. The unity. It is an essential requirement of a hypothesis that it be
only one and that it not need any subsidiary hypotheses for its support. If,
in the case of a hypothesis, we have to have several others to help, then it
thereby loses very much of its probability. For the more consequences that
may be derived from a hypothesis, the more probable it is, the fewer, the
more improbable. Thus Tycho Brake's hypothesis, for example, did not
suffice for the explanation of many appearances; hence he assumed sev-
86 eral new hypotheses to complete it.'9 Now here it is to be surmised that the
assumed hypothesis cannot be the real ground. The Copernican system,
on the other hand, is an hypothesis from which everything can be ex-
586
plained that ought to be explained therefrom, sofar as it hasyet occurred to
us. Here we do not need any subsidiary hypotheses (hypotheses subsidiarias).
There are sciences that do not allow any hypotheses, as, for example,
mathematics and metaphysics. But in the doctrine of nature they are
useful and indispensable.
APPENDIX
Of the distinction between theoretical and practical cognition
A cognition is called practical as opposed to theoretical, but also as opposed
to speculative cognition.
Practical cognitions are, namely, either
1. imperatives, and are to this extent opposed to theoretical cognitions; or they
contain
2. the grounds for possible imperatives and are to this extent opposed to speculative
cognitions.
By an imperative is to be understood in general every proposition that
expresses a possible free action, whereby a certain end is to be made real.
Every cognition that contains imperatives is practical, then, and is to be
called practical in opposition to theoretical cognition. For theoretical cognitions are ones that express not what ought to be but rather what is, hence
they have as their object not an acting' but rather a being.'
On the other hand, if we oppose practical to speculative cognitions, then
they can also be theoretical, provided only that imperatives can be derived from
them. Considered in this respect they are then practical as to content (in
potentia) or objectively. By speculative cognitions we understand, namely,
ones from which no rules for proceeding can be derived, or which contain
no grounds for possible imperatives. There is a multitude of such speculative propositions in theology, for example. Speculative cognitions of this
sort are always theoretical, then, but it is not the case, conversely, that 87
every theoretical cognition is speculative; it can also be at the same time
practical, considered in another respect.
In the end everything comes down to the practical, and the practical
worth of our cognition consists in this tendency of everything theoretical
and all speculation in regard to its use. This worth is unconditioned, however, only if the end toward which the practical use of the cognition is
directed is an unconditioned end. The sole, unconditioned, and final end
(ultimate end) to which all practical use of our cognition must finally
relate is morality, which on this account we may also call the practical
without qualification or the absolutely practical. And that part of philosophy
' "'kein Handeln?
' "ein Sein.'
587
which has morality as its object would accordingly have to be called
practical philosophy xat' e^o/riv;" although every other philosophical
science always has its practical part, i.e., can contain a directive from the
theories advanced for their practical use for the realization of certain ends.
" par excellence.
588/. Universal doctrine of elements
FIRST SECTION 91
Of concepts
§i
The concept in general and its distinctionfrom intuition
All cognitions, that is, all representations related with consciousness to an
object, are either intuitions or concepts. An intuition is a singular" representation (repraesentatio singularis), a concept a universal (repraesentatio per notas
communes) or reflected" representation (repraesentatio discursiva).
Cognition through concepts is called thought (cognitio discursiva).
Note i. A concept is opposed to intuition, for it is a universal representation, or a
representation of what is common to several objects, hence a representation insofar as it can be contained in various ones.20
2. It is a mere tautology to speak of universal or common* concepts - a
mistake that is grounded in an incorrect division of concepts into universal, particular, and singular. Concepts themselves cannot be so divided,
but only theiruse.
§2
Matter and form of concepts
With every concept we are to distinguish matter and form. The matter of
concepts is the object, their form universality.
"einzelne."
"reflectirte."
"gemeinsamen."
589
92 §3
Empirical and pure concept
A concept is either an empirical or a pure concept (vel empiricus vel intellectualis). A pure concept is one that is not abstracted-1' from experience but
arises rather from the understanding even as to content.
An idea is a concept of reason whose object simply cannot be met with
in experience.
Note i. An empirical concept arises from the senses through comparison of
objects of experience and attains through the understandingmerely the
form of universality. The reality of these concepts rests on actual experience, from which, as to their content, they are drawn/ But whether there
are pure concepts of the understanding (conceptus pun), which, as such, arise
merely from the understanding, independently of all experience,must be
investigated by metaphysics.
2. Concepts of reason, or ideas, simply cannot lead to actual objects, because these latter must all be contained in a possible experience.But they
serve to lead the understanding by means of reason in regard to experience and to the use of its rules in the greatest perfection, or also to show
that not all possible things are objects of experience, and that the principles of the possibility of the latter do not hold of things in themselves, nor
of objects of experience as things in themselves.
An idea contains the archetype for the use of the understanding, e.g., the
idea of the world whole, which idea must necessarily be, not as constitutive
principle for the empirical use of the understanding, but as regulative
principle for the sake of the thoroughgoing connection" of our empirical
use of the understanding. Thus it is to be regarded as a necessary basic
concept, either for objectively completing the understanding's actions of
subordination or for regarding them as unlimited.- The idea cannot be
attained by composition, either, for the whole is prior to the part. There are
ideas, however, to which an approximation occurs. This is the case with
mathematical ideas, or ideas of the mathematical production of a whole, which
differ essentially from dynamical ideas, which are completely heterogeneous
93 from all concrete concepts, because the whole is different from concrete
concepts not as to quantity (as with the mathematical ideas) but rather as
to kind.
One cannot provide objective reality for any theoretical idea, or prove it,
except for the idea of freedom, because this is the condition of the moral
* "abgezogen."
* "geschöpft."
* "des durchgängigen Zusammenhanges."
590
law, whose reality is an axiom. The reality of the idea of God can only be
proved by means of this idea, and hence only with a practical purpose, i.e.,
to act as if there is a God, and hence only for this purpose.
In all sciences, above all in those of reason, the idea of the science is its
universal abstract or outline,hence the extension of all the cognitions* that
belong to it. Such an idea of the whole - the first thing one has to look to
in a science, and which one has to seek - is architeäonic, as, e.g., the idea
of jurisprudence/
Most men lack the idea of humanity, the idea of a perfect republic, of a
happy life, etc. Many men have no idea of what they want, hence they
proceed according to instinct and authority.
§4
Concepts that are given (a priori or a posteriori) and concepts
that are made
All concepts, as to matter, are either given (conceptus dati) or made (conceptus
factitii). The former are given either a priori or a posteriori.
All concepts that are given empirically or a posteriori are called concepts of
experience/ all that are given a priori are called notions.
Note. The form of a concept, as that of a discursive representation, is always
made.
§5
Logical origin of concepts
The origin of concepts as to mereform rests on reflection and on abstraction from the difference among things that are signified by a certain
representation. And thus arises here the question: Which acts of the understanding constitute a concept? or what is the same, Which are involved in the
generation of a concept out of given representations?
Note i. Since universal logic abstracts from all content of cognition through 94
concepts, or from all matter of thought, it can consider a concept only in
respect of its form, i.e., only subjectively; not how it determines an object
through a mark, but only how it can be related to several objects. Hence
* "Kenntnisse."
' "Rechtswissenschaft."
d "Erfahrungsbegriffe."
591
universal logic does not have to investigate the source of concepts, not how
concepts arise as representations, but merely horv given representations become
concepts in thought; these concepts, moreover, may contain something that
is derived from experience, or something invented, or borrowed from the
nature of the understanding. - This logical origin of concepts - the
origin as to their mere form - consists in reflection,whereby a representation common to several objects (conceptus communis) arises, as that form
which is required for the power of judgment. Thus in logic only the
difference in reflection in concepts is considered.
The origin of concepts in regard to their matter, according to which a
concept is either empirical or arbitrary or intellectual, is considered in
metaphysics.
§6
Logical Actu s of comparison, reflection, and abstraction
The logical actus of the understanding, through which concepts are generated as to their form, are:
1. comparison1 of representations among one another in relation to the unity of
consciousness;
2. reflection*as to how various representations can be conceived in one consciousness; andfinally
3. abstraction1 of everything else in which the given representations differ.
Note i. To make concepts out of representations one must thus be able to
compare, to reflect, and to abstract, for these three logical operations of the
understanding are the essential and universal conditions for generation
of every concept whatsoever. I see, e.g., a spruce, a willow, and a linden.
By first comparing these objects with one another I note that they are
different from one another in regard to the trunk, the branches, the
leaves, etc.; but next I reflect on that which they have in common
95 among themselves, trunk, branches, and leaves themselves, and I abstract from the quantity, the figure, etc., of these; thus I acquire a
concept of a tree.
2. The expression abstraction is not always used correctly in logic. We must
not speak of abstracting something (abstrahere aliquid), but rather of abstracting from something (abstrahere ab aliquo). With a scarlet cloth, for
example, if I think only of the red color, then I abstract from the cloth; if I
abstract from this too and think the scarlet as a material stuff in general,
then I abstract from still more determinations, and my concept has in this
' "Cotnparation, d.i., die Vergleichung."
1 "'Reflexion, d.i. dieÜberlegung."
g "-Abstraction oder die Absonderung."
592
way become still more abstract. For the more the differences among
things that are left out of a concept, or the more the determinations from
which we abstract in that concept, the more abstract the concept is.
Abstract concepts, therefore, should really be called abstracting concepts
(conceptus abstrahentes), i.e., ones in which several abstractions occur.
Thus the concept body is really not an abstract concept, for I cannot
abstract from body itself, else I would not have the concept of it. But I
must of course abstract from the size, the color, the hardness or fluidity,
in short, from all the special determinations of particular bodies. The
most abstract concept is the one that has nothing in common with any
distinct from itself. This is the concept of something, for that which is
different from it is nothing, and it thus has nothing in common with
something.
Abstraction is only the negative condition under which universalrepresentations can be generated, the positive condition is comparison and reflection. For no concept comes to be through abstraction; abstraction only
perfects it and encloses it in its determinate limits.
§7
Content and extension of concepts
Every concept, as partial concept, is contained in the representation of
things; as ground of 'cognition, i.e., as mark,1" these things are contained under
it. In the former respect every concept has a content, in the other an
extension.
The content and extension of a concept stand in inverse relation to one
another. The more a concept contains under itself, namely, the less it
contains in itself, and conversely.
Note. The universality or universal validityof a concept does not rest on the fact
that the concept is a partial concept, but rather on the fact that it is a ground
of cognition.
§8 96
Quantity of the extension of concepts
The more the things that stand under a concept and can be thought
through it, the greater is its extension or sphere.
Ak, "'d.i. alsMerkmar; ist ed., "d.i. als Merkmal."
593
Note. As one says of a ground in general that it contains the consequence under
itself, so can one also say of the concept that as ground of cognition it
contains all those things under itself from which it has been abstracted,
e.g., the concept of metal contains under itself gold, silver, copper, etc. For
since every concept, as a universally valid representation, contains that
which is common to several representations of various things, all these
things, which are to this extent contained under it, can be represented
through it. And it is just this that constitutes the usefulness of a concept.
The more the things that can be represented through a concept, the
greater is its sphere. Thus the concept body, for example, has a greater
extension than the concept metal.
§9
Higher and lower concepts
Concepts are called higher (conceptus superiores) insofar as they have other
concepts under themselves, which, in relation to them, are called lower concepts. A mark of a mark - a remote mark - isa higher concept, the concept
in relation to a remote mark is a lower one.
Note. Since higher and lower concepts are so called only relatively (respective^,
one and the same concept can, in various relations, be simultaneously a
higher one and a lower one. Thus the concept man is a higher one in
relation to the concept Negro,' but a lower one in relation to the concept
animal.
§10
Genus and species
The higher concept, in respect to its lower one, is called genus/ the lower
concept in regard to its higher one species.k
97 Like higher and lower concepts, genus and species concepts are distinguished not as to their nature, then, but only in regard to their relation to
one another (termini a quo or ad quod1} in logical subordination.
Ak, "Neger"; ist ed., "Pferd."
"Gattung (genus). "
"An (species)."
terms from which [or] to which.
594
Highest genus and lowest species
The highest genus is that which is not a species (genus summum non est
species), just as the lowest species is that which is not a genus (species, quae
non est genus, est infimd).
In consequence of the law of continuity, however, there cannot be
either a lowest or a next species.
Note. If we think of a series of several concepts subordinated to one another,
e.g., iron, metal, body, substance, thing, then here we can attain ever
higher genera - for every species is always to be considered at the same
time as genus in regard to its lower concept, e.g., the concept learned man
in regard to the concept philosopher - until we finally come to a genus that
cannot in turn be a species. And we must finally be able to attain such a
one, because in the end there must be a highest concept (conceptus
summus), from which, as such, nothing further may be abstracted without
the whole concept disappearing. - But in the series of species andgenera there is no lowest concept (conceptus infimus) or lowest species, under
which no other would be contained, because such a one cannot possibly
be determined. For even if we have a concept that we apply immediately
to individuals, there can still be specific differences in regard to it, which
we either do not note, or which we disregard. Only comparatively for use
are there lowest concepts, which have attained this significance,"1 as it
were, through convention, insofar as one has agreed not to go deeper
here.
In respect to the determination of species and genus concepts, then, the
following universal law holds: There is a genus that cannot in turn be a species,
but there is no species that should not be able in turn to be a genus.
§12 98
Broader and narrower concept - Convertible concepts
The higher concept is also called a broader concept, the lower concept a
narrower one.
Concepts that have one and the same sphere are called convertible
concepts" (conceptus redproci).
"Bedeutung."
"Wechselbegriffe."
595
§13
Relation of the lower concept to the higher, of the broader
to the narrower
The lower concept is not contained in the higher, for it contains more in
itself than does the higher one; it is contained under it, however, because
the higher contains the ground of cognition of the lower.
Furthermore, one concept is not broader than another because it contains
more under itself - for one cannot know that - but rather insofar as it
contains under itself the other concept and besides this still more.
§i4
Universal rules in respeu of the subordination of concepts
In regard to the logical extension of concepts, the following universal rules
hold:
1. What belongs to or contradicts higher concepts also belongs to or contradicts
all lower concepts that are contained under those higher ones; and
2. conversely: What belongs to or contradicts all lower concepts also belongs to
or contradicts their higher concept.
Note. Because that in which things agree flows from their universal properties,
and that in which they are different from one another flows from their
particular properties, one cannot infer that what belongs to or contradicts
one lower concept also belongs to or contradicts other lower concepts,
99 which belong with it to one higher concept. Thus one cannot infer, e.g.,
that what does not belong to man does not belong to angels either.
§15
Conditions for higher and lower concepts to arise: Logical abstraction
and logical determination
Through continued logical abstraction higher and higher concepts arise,
just as through continued logical determination, on the other hand, lower
and lower concepts arise. The greatest possible abstraction yields the
highest or most abstract concept - that from which no determinationcan
be further thought away. The highest, completed determination would
yield a thoroughly determinate concept (conceptus omnimode determinate),
i.e., one to which no further determination might be added in thought.
596
Note. Since only individual things," or individuals/ are thoroughly determinate,
there can be thoroughly determinate cognitions only as intuitions, but not
as concepts; in regard to the latter, logical determination can never be
regarded as completed (§ n, Note).
§16
Use of concepts in abstracto and in concreto
Every concept can be used universally or particularly (in abstracto or in
concreto). The lower concept is used in abstracto in regard to its higher one,
the higher concept in concreto in regard to its lower one.
Note i. Thus the expressions abstract and concrete relate not to concepts in
themselves - for every concept is an abstract concept - but rather only to
dieir use. And this use can in turn have various degrees, accordingly as
one treats a concept more or less abstractly or concretely, i.e., as one
either leaves aside or adds more or fewer determinations. Through abstract use a concept comes closer to the highest genus, through concrete IOO
use, on die other hand, to the individual.
2. Which use of concepts, the abstract or die concrete, has an advantage
over the odier? Nodiing can be decided about this. The worth of the one
is not to be valued less than the worth of the other. Through very abstract
concepts we cognize little in many things, through very concrete concepts
we cognize much mfew tilings; what we win on the one side, then, we lose
again on the other. A concept that has a large sphere is very useful insofar
as one can apply it to many things; but in return for that, there is that
much less contained in it. In the concept substance, for example, I do not
tiiink as much as in the concept chalk.
j. The art of popularity consists in finding die relation between representation in abstracto and in concreto in die same cognition, hence between
concepts and dieir exhibition, through which the maximum of cognition
is achieved, both as to extension and as to content.
SECOND SECTION 101
Of judgments
§17
Definition* of a judgment in general
A judgment is the representation of the unity of the consciousness of
various representations, or the representation of their relation insofar as
they constitute a concept.
° "einzelne Dinge."
p "Individuen."
* "Erklärung."
597
§18
Matter and form of judgments
Matter and form belong to every judgment as essential constituents of it.
The matter of the judgment consists in the given representations that are
combined in the unity of consciousness in the judgment, the form in the
determination of the way that the various representations belong, as such,
to one consciousness.
§19
Object of logical reflection the mereform of judgments
Since logic abstracts from all real or objective difference of cognition, it
can occupy itself as litde with the matter of judgments as with the content
of concepts. Thus it has only the difference among judgmentsin regard to
their mere form to take into consideration.
102 §20
Logical forms of judgments: Quantity, quality, relation, and modality
The distinctions among judgmentsin respect of their form may be traced
back to the four principal moments of quantify, quality, relation, and modality, in regard to which just as many different kinds of judgments are
determined.
§21
Quantity ofjudgments: Universal, particular, singular
As to quantity, judgments are either universal or particular or singular,
accordingly as the subject is either wholly mcluded in or «-eluded from the
notion of the predicate or is only in part /«eluded in or excluded from it. In
the universal judgment, the sphere of one concept is wholly enclosed
within the sphere of another; in the particular, a part of the former is
enclosed under the sphere of the other; and in the singular judgment,
finally, a concept that has no sphere at all is enclosed, merely as part then,
under the sphere of another.
598
Note i. As to logical form, singular judgments are to be assessed as like universal
ones in use, for in both the predicate holds of the subject without exception. In the singular proposition, Caius is mortal, for example, there can
just as little be an exception as in the universal one, All men are mortal.
For there is only one Caius.
2. In respect of the universalityr of a cognition, there exists a real distinction
between general1 and universal' propositions, which of course does not
have to do with logic, however. General propositions, namely, are those
that contain merely something of the universal regarding certain objects,
and consequently do not contain sufficient conditions of subsumption,
e.g., the proposition that one must make proofs thorough. Universal"
propositions are those that maintain something universally1' of an object.
j. Universal rules are either analytically or synthetically universal. The former
abstract from differences, the latter attend to distinctions and consequently determine in regard to them too. The more simply an object is 103
thought, the more possible is analytic universality in consequence of a
concept.
4. If we cannot have insight into universal propositions in their universality
without cognizing01 them in concreto, then they cannot serve as a standard
and hence cannot hold heuristically in application,but are only assignments
to investigate the universal grounds for that with which we first became
acquainted in particular cases. For example, the proposition, He whohas no
interest in lying and who knows the truth will speak the truth; we cannot have
insight into this proposition in its universality, because we are acquainted
with the restriction to the condition of the disinterested - namely, that
men can lie out of interest, which comes because they do not hold fast to
morality - only through experience. An observation that teaches us the
weakness of human nature.
5. Of particular judgments it is to be noted that if it is to be possible to have
insight into them through reason, and hence for them to have a rational,
not merely intellectual (abstracted) form, then the subject must be a
broader concept (conceptus latior) than the predicate. Let the predicate
always = O> the subject Q, then
is a particular judgment, for some of what belongs under a is b, some not
b - that follows from reason. But let it be
"Allgemeinheit."
"generalen."
"universalen."
"Universale."
"allgemein."
"kennen."
599
then at least all a can be contained under b, if it is smaller, but not if it is
greater, hence it is particular only by accident.
§22
Quality ofjudgments: Affirmative, negative, infinite
As to quality, judgments are either affirmative or negative or infinite. In the
affirmative judgment the subject is thought under the sphere of a predicate,
in the negative it is posited outside the sphere of the latter, and in the infinite
104 it is posited in the sphere of a concept that lies outside the sphere of
another.
Note i. The infinite judgment indicates not merely that a subject is not contained
under the sphere of a predicate, but that it lies somewhere in the infinite
sphere outside its sphere; consequently this judgment represents the
sphere of the predicate as restricted.
Everything possible is either^ or nonA. If I say, then, something is non
A, e.g., the human Soul is non-mortal, some men are non-learned, etc.,
then this is an infinite judgment. For it is not thereby determined, concerning the finite sphere A, under which concept the object belongs, but
merely that it belongs in the sphere outside A, which is really no sphere at
all but only a sphere's sharing of a limit with the infinite* or the limiting
itself.y Now although exclusion is a negation, the restriction2 of a concept
is still a positive act. Therefore limits" are positive concepts of restricted*
objects.
2. According to the principle of the excluded middle' (exclusi tertii), the
sphere of one concept relative to another is either exclusive or inclusive.
Now since logic has to do merely with the form of judgment, not with
concepts as to their content, the distinction of infinite from negative
judgments is not proper to this science.
j. In negative judgments the negation always affects the copula; in infinite
ones it is not the copula but rather the predicate that is affected, which
may best be expressed in Latin.
* "die Angrenzung einer Sphäre an das Unendliche."
y "die Begrenzung selbst."
' "Beschränkung."
* "Grenzen."
* "beschränkter."
' "Principium der Ausschließung jedes Dritten."
600
Relation ofjudgments: Categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive
As to relation, judgments are either categorical or hypothetical or disjunctive.
The given representations in judgment are subordinated one to another
for the unity of consciousness, namely, either as predicate to subjert, or as
consequence to ground, or as member of the division to the divided concept.
Through the first relation categorical judgments are determined, through
the second hypothetical, and through the third disjunctive.
§24 105
Categorical judgments
In categorical judgments, subject and predicate constitute their matter;
the form, through which the relation (of agreement or of opposition)
between subject and predicate is determined and expressed, is called the
copula^.
Note. Categorical judgments constitute the matter of the remaining judgments,
to be sure, but one must not on this account believe, as several logicians
do, that both hypothetical and disjunctive judgments are nothing more
than various clothings of categoricals and hence may be wholly traced back
to these latter. All three kinds of judgments rest on essentially different
logical functions of the understanding and must therefore be considered
according to their specific difference.
§25
Hypothetical judgments
The matter of hypothetical judgments consists of two judgments that are
connected with one another as ground and consequence. One of these
judgments, which contains the ground, is the antecedent11 (antecedens, prius),
the other, which is related to it as consequence, is the consequent'
(consequens, posterius), and the representation of this kind of connection of
two judgments to one another for the unity of consciousness is called the
consequentia, which constitutes iheform of hypothetical judgments.
d "Vordersatz."
' "Nachsatz."
601I M M A N U E L KANT
Note i. What the copulaL is for categorical judgments, then, the consequentia is for
hypotheticals - their form.
2. Some believe it is easy to transform a hypothetical proposition into a
categorical. But this will not do, because the two are wholly different from
one another as to their nature. In categoricaljudgmentsnothing is problematic, rather, everything is assertoric, but in hypotheticals only the consequentia is assertoric. In the latter I can thus connect two false judgments
with one another, for here it is only a matter of the correctness of the
106 connection - the form of the consequentia, onwhich the logical truth of
these judgments rests. There is an essential difference between the two
propositions, Allbodies are divisible, and, If all bodies are composite, then
they are divisible. In the former proposition I maintain the thing directly, in
the latter only under a condition expressed problematically.
§26
Modes of connection in hypothetical judgments: modus ponens
and modus tollens
The form of the connection in hypothetical judgments is of two kinds: the
positing^ (modus ponens) and the denying^ (modus tollens).
1. If the ground (antecedens) is true, then the consequence (consequens) determined by it is true too; called modusponens.
2. If the consequence (consequens) is false, then the ground (antecedens) is false
too; modus tollens.
§2?
Disjunaive judgments
A judgment is disjunctive if the parts of the sphere of a given concept
determine one another in the whole or toward a whole* as complements
(complementa).
§28
Matter and form of disjunctive judgments
The several given judgments of which the disjunctive judgment is composed constitute its matter and are called the members of the disjunction or
opposition. The form of these judgments consists in the disjunction itself,
f "setzende."
s "aufhebende?
* "in dem Ganzen oder zu einem Ganzen."
602
i.e., in the determination of the relation of the various judgments as
members of the whole sphere of the divided cognition which mutually
exclude one another and complement one another.
Note. Thus all disjunctive judgments represent various judgments as in thecommunity of a sphere and produce each judgment only through the restriction 107
of the others in regard to the whole sphere; they determine each judgment's relation to the whole sphere, then, and thereby at the same time the
relation that these various members of the division (membra disjuncta) have
among themselves. Thus one member determines every other here only
insofar as they stand together in community as parts of a whole sphere of
cognition, outside of which, in a certain relation, nothing may be thought.
§29
Peculiar character of disjunctive judgments
The peculiar character of all disjunctive judgments,whereby their specific
difference from others, in particular from categorical judgments, is determined as to the moment of relation, consists in this: that the members of
the disjunction are all problematic judgments, of which nothing else is
thought except that, taken together as parts of the sphere of a cognition,
each the complement of the other toward the whole (complementum ad
totum), they are equal to the sphere of the first. And from this it follows
that in one of these problematic judgments the truth must be contained
or - what is the same - that one of them must hold assertorically, because
outside of them the sphere of the cognition includes nothing more under
the given conditions, and one is opposed to the other, consequently neither something outside them nor more than one among them can be true.
Note. In a categorical judgment the thing whose representation is considered as a
part of the sphere of another, subordinated representation is considered as
contained under this, its higher concept; thus here, in the subordination of
the spheres, the part of the part is compared with the whole. But in
disjunctive judgments I go from the whole to all the parts taken together.
What is contained under the sphere of a concept is also contained under
one of the parts of this sphere. Accordingly, the sphere must first be
divided. If, for example, I make the disjunctive judgment, A learned man is
learned either historically or in matters of reason, I thereby determine that
these concepts are,as to the sphere, parts of the sphere of the learnedman,
but not in any way parts of one another, and that taken together they are all
complete.
The following schema of comparison between categorical and disjunc- 108
603I M M A N U E L KANT
live judgments may make it more intuitive that in disjunctive judgments the
sphere of the divided concept is not considered as contained in the sphere
of the divisions, but rather that which is contained under the divided
concept is considered as contained under one of the members of the
division.
In categorical judgments x, which is contained under b, is also under a:
In disjunctive ones x, which is contained under a, is contained either under
b or c, etc.:
Thus the division in disjunctive judgments indicates the coordination not
of the parts of the whole concept, but rather all the parts of its sphere.
Here I think many things through one concept, there one thing through' many
concepts, e.g., the definitum through all the marks of coordination.
§3°
Modality ofjudgments: Problematic, assertoric, apodeictic
As to modality, through which moment the relation of the whole judgment
to the faculty of cognition is determined, judgments are either problematic
or assertoric or apodeictic. The problematic ones are accompanied with the
consciousness of the mere possibility of the judging, the assertoric ones
with the consciousness of its actuality, the apodeictic ones, finally, with the
consciousness of its necessity.
Note i.
109
This moment of modality indicates, then, only the way in which something is maintained or denied in judgment: whether one does not settle
anything concerning the truth or untruth of a judgment, as in the problematic judgment, The soul of man may be immortal; or whether one
determines something concerning it, as in the assertoric judgment, The
human soul is immortal; or, finally, whether one even expresses the truth
of a judgment with the dignity of necessity, as in the apodeictic judgment,
Ak, "durch"; ist ed., "durch."
604
The soul of man must be immortal. This determination of merely possible or actual or necessary truth concerns only thejudgment itself, then, not
in any way the thing about which we judge.
2. In problematic judgments, which one can also explain as ones whose
material is given with the possible relation between predicate and subject,
the subject must always have a smaller sphere than the predicate.
j. On the distinction between problematic and assertoric judgments rests
the true distinction between judgments and propositions, which is customarily placed, wrongly, in the mere expression through words, without
which one simply could not judge at all. In judgment the relation of
various representations to the unity of consciousness is thought merely as
problematic, but in a proposition as assertoric. A problematic proposition
is a contradictio in adjecto. Before I have a proposition I must first judge;
and I judge about much that I cannot decide, which I must do, however,
as soon as I determine a judgment as a proposition. It is good, by the way,
first to judge problematically, before one accepts the judgment as assertoric, in order to examine it in this way. Also, it is not always necessary to
our purpose to have assertoric judgments.
§31
Exponible judgments
Judgments in which an affirmation and a negation are contained simultaneously, but in a covert way, so that the affirmation occurs distinctly but
the negation covertly, are exponible propositions.
Note. In the exponible judgment, Few men are learned, for example lies (i.), but
in a covert way, the negative judgment,Many men are not learned, and(2.)
the affirmative one, Some men are learned. Since the nature of exponible
propositions depends merely on conditions of language, in accordance
with which one can express two judgments briefly at once, the observation
that in our language there can be judgments that must be expounded
belongs not to logic but to grammar.
§32 no
Theoretical and practical propositions
Those propositions that relate to the object and determine what belongs
or does not belong to it are called theoretical; practical propositions, on the
other hand, are those diat state the action whereby, as its necessary condition, an object becomes possible.
605
Note. Logic has to deal only with propositions that are practical as toform, which
are to this extent opposed to theoretical ones. Propositions that are practical
as to content, and to this extent are distinct from speculative ones, belong to
morals.
§33
Indemonstrable and demonstrable propositions
Demonstrable propositions are those that are capable of a proof; those not
capable of a proof are called indemonstrable.
Immediately certain judgments are indemonstrable and thus are to be
regarded as elementary propositions.
§34
Principles
Immediately certain judgments apriorican be called principles/ insofar as
other judgments are proved from them, but they themselves cannot be
subordinated to any other. On this account they are also called principles'1
(beginnings').
§35
Intuitive and discursive principles: Axioms and acroamata
Principles are either intuitive or discursive. The former can be exhibited in
intuition and are called axioms (axiomata), the latter may be expressed only
through concepts and can be called acroamata.
in §36
Analytic and synthetic propositions
Propositions whose certainty rests on identity of concepts (of the predicate
with the notion of the subject) are called analytic propositions."1 Propositions whose truth is not grounded on identity of concepts must be called
synthetic.
' "Grundsätze."
* "Prinzipien."
' "Anfänge."
™ Ak, "Sätze"; ist ed., "Sätze."
606
Note I. An example of an analytic proposition is, To everything x, to which the
concept of body (a + b) belongs, belongs also extension (b)
An example of a synthetic proposition is, To everything x, to which the
concept of body (a+b) belongs, belongs also attraction (c). Synthetic
propositions increase cognition materialiter, analytic ones merely formaliter. The former contain determinations (determinationes), the latter
only logical" predicates.
2. Analytic principles are not axioms, for they are discursive. And even
synthetic principles are axioms only if they are intuitive.
§37
Tautological propositions
The identity of the concepts in analytic judgments can be either explicit
(explicita) or non-explicit (implicita). In the first case the analytic propositions are tautological.
Note i. Tautological propositions are empty virtualiter, or empty of consequences,0
for they are without value or use. The tautological proposition, Man is
man, is of this sort, for example. For if I do not know anything more to say
of man except that he is a man, then I know nothing more of him at all.
Propositions that are identical implicite, on the other hand, are not
empty of consequences or fruitless, for they make clear the predicate that
lay undeveloped (implicite) in the concept of the subject through development11 (explicatio).
2. Propositions that are empty of consequences must be distinguished from
ones that are empty of sense,9 which are empty in meaning' because they
concern the determination of so-called hidden properties (qualitates occultae).
§38 112
Postulate and problem
A postulate is a practical, immediately certain proposition, or a principle
that determines a possible action, in the case of which it is presupposed
that the way of executing it is immediately certain.
Problems (problemata) are demonstrable propositions that require a direc-
" Ak, "logische"; ist ed., "logische."
° "folgeleer."
p "Entwickelung."
* "sinnleeren."
' "leer an Verstand."
607I M M A N U E L KANT
tive, or ones that express an action, the manner of whose execution is not
immediately certain.
Note i. There can also be theoretical postulates on behalf of practical reason.
These are theoretical hypotheses that are necessary for a practical purpose of reason, like those of the existence of God, of freedom, and of
another world.
2. A problem involves (i.) the question,1 which contains what is to be accomplished, (2.) the resolution, which contains the way in which what is to be
accomplished can be executed, and (3.) the demonstration that when I
have proceeded thus, what is required will occur.
§39
Theorems, corollaries, lemmas, and scholia
Theorems are theoretical propositions that are capable of and require
proof. Corollaries are immediate consequences from a preceding proposition. Propositions that are not indigenous to the science in which they are
presupposed as proved, but rather are borrowed from other sciences, are
called lemmas (lemmata). Scholia, finally, are mere elucidative propositions,'
which thus do not belong to the whole of the system asmembers.
Note. Essential and universal moments of every theorem are the thesis and the
demonstration. Furthermore, one can place the distinction between theorems and corollaries in the fact that the latter are inferred immediately, but
the former are drawn through a series of consequences from immediately
certain propositions.
114 §40
Judgments of perception and of experience
A judgment of perception is merely subjective, an objective judgment from
perceptions is ajudgment of experience.
Note. A judgment from mere perceptions is really not possible, except through
the fact that I express my representation as perception: I, who perceive a
' "Quästion."
' "Erläuterungssätze."
608
tower, perceive in it the red color. But I cannot say: It is red.For this would
not be merely an empirical judgment, but a judgment of experience, i.e., an
empirical judgment through which I get a concept of the object. E.g., In
touching the stone I sense warmth, is a judgment of perception: but on the
other hand, The stone is warm, is a judgment of experience. It pertains to
the latter that I do not reckon to the object what is merely in my subject, for
a judgment of experience is perception from which a concept of the object
arises; e.g., whether points of light move on the moon or in the air or in my
eye.
THIRD SECTION 114
Of inferences
§4i
Inference in general
By inferring is to be understood that function of thought whereby one
judgment is derived from another. An inference is thus in general the
derivation of one judgment from the other.
§42
Immediate and mediate inferences
All inferences are either immediate or mediate.
An immediate inference (consequentia immediata) is the derivation (deductio) of one judgment from the other without a mediating judgment
(judicium intermedium). An inference is mediate if, besides the concept that
a judgment contains in itself, one needs still others in order to derive a
cognition therefrom.
§43
Inferences of the understanding, inferences of reason, and inferences of
the power of judgment
Immediate inferences are also called inferences of the understanding; all
mediate inferences, on the other hand, are either inferences of reason or
inferences of the power ofjudgment. We deal here first with immediate inferences, or inferences of the understanding.
609
115 I. INFERENCES OF THE UNDERSTANDING
§44
Peculiar nature of inferences of the understanding
The essential character of all immediate inferences and the principle of
their possibility consists simply in an alteration of the mereform of judgments, while the matter of the judgments, the subject and predicate,
remains unaltered, the same.
Note i. By virtue of the fact that in immediate inferences only the form of judgments is altered and not in any way the matter, these inferences differ
essentially from all mediate inferences,in which the judgments are distinct
as to matter too, since here a new concept must be added as mediating
judgment or as middle concept (terminus medius) in order to deduce the
one judgment from the other. If I infer, e.g., All men are mortal, hence
Caius is mortal too, this is not an immediate inference. For here I need for
the deduction the mediating judgment, Caius is a man; through this new
concept, however, the matter of the judgments is altered.
2. With inferences of the understanding ajudidum intermedium may also be
made, to be sure, but then this mediating judgment is merely tautological.
As, for example, in the immediate inference, All men are mortal, some
men are men, hence some men are mortal, the middle concept is a tautological proposition.
§45
Modi of inferences of the understanding
Inferences of the understanding run through all the classes of the logical
functions of judgment and consequently are determined in theirprincipal
kinds through the momentsof quantity, quality, relation, and modality. On
this rests the following division of these inferences.
116 §46
i. Inferences of the understanding (in relation to the quantity of
judgments) per judicia subalternata
In inferences of the understanding perjudicia subalternata the two judgments are distinct as to quantity, and here the particular judgment is
derived from the universal in consequence of the principle: The inference
610
from the universal to the particular is valid (ab universali ad particulare valet
consequentia).
Note. Ajudidum is called subaltematum insofar as it is contained under the other,
as, e.g.,particular judgments are under universal ones.
§47
2. Inferences of the understanding (in relation to the quality of
judgments) per judicia opposita
In inferences of the understanding of this kind, the alteration concerns
the quality of the judgments, and this considered in relation to opposition.
Now since this opposition can be of three kinds, the following particular
division of immediate inference results: through contradictorily opposed,
through contrary, and subcontrary judgments."
Note. Inferences of the understanding through equivalent" judgments (judicia
aequipollentia) cannot really be called inferences, for there is no consequence here; they are rather to be regarded as a mere substitution of words
that signify one and the same concept, where the judgments themselves
also remain unaltered as to form. E.g., Not all men are virtuous, and, Some
men are not virtuous. The two judgments say one and the same thing.
§48
a. Inferences of the understanding per judicia contradictorie
opposita
In inferences of the understanding through judgments which are opposed
to one another contradictorily and which, as such, constitute genuine,
pure opposition, the truth of one of the contradictorily opposed judgments 117
is deduced from the falsehood of the other, and conversely. For genuine
opposition, which occurs here, contains no more and no less than what
belongs to opposition. In consequence of the principle of the excluded middle," the two contradicting judgments cannot both be true, and just as little
can they both be false. If the one is true, then the other is false, and
conversely.
" Ak, "durch conträre und durch subconträre Urtheile"; ist ed., "durch conträre und
subconträre Urtheile."
1 "gleichgeltende."
" "Princip desausschließenden Dritten."
611
§49
b. Inferences of the understanding per judicia* contrarie opposita
Contrary or conflicting judgments (judicia contrarie opposita) are judgments of which the one is universally affirmative, the other universally
negative. Now since one of them says more than the other, and since in
the excess - that it says more than the mere negation of the other -
there can lie falsehood, they cannot both be true, of course, but they can
both be false. In regard to these judgments, therefore, only the inference
from the truth of the one to the falsehood of the other holds, hut not conversely.
§50
c. Inferences of the understanding per judicia subcontrarie opposita
Subcontrary judgments are ones of which the one affirms or denies in
particular (particulariter) what the other denies or affirms in particular.
Since they can both be true but cannot both be false, only the following
inference holds in regard to them: If one of these propositions isfalse, the other
is true, but not conversely.
Note. In the case of subcontrary judgments there is no pure, strict opposition, for
what is affirmed or denied in the one is not denied or affirmed of the same
objects in the other. In the inference, e.g., Some men are learned, hence
some men are not learned, what is denied in the second judgment is not
affirmed of the same men in the first.
118 §51
3. Inferences of the understanding (with respect to the relation of
judgments) per judicia conversa sive per conversionem
Immediate inferences through conversion concern the relation of judgments and consist in the transposition of subject and predicate in the two
judgments, so that the subject of the one judgment is made the predicate
of the other judgment, and conversely.
Ak, "judica"; ist ed., "judicia."
612
§52
Pure and altered conversion
In conversion the quantity of the judgments is either altered or it remains
unaltered. In the first case the converted (conversum) is distinct from what
converts (convertens) as to quantity, and the conversion is said to be altered3'
(conversio per accidens); in the latter case the conversion is called pure
(conversio simpliciter talis).
§53
Universal rules of conversion
With respect to inferences of the understanding through conversion, the
following rules hold:
1. Universal affirmative2 judgments may be converted only per accidens', for the
predicate in these judgments is a broader concept and thus only some of it is
contained in the concept of the subject.
2. But all universal negative" judgments may be converted simpliciter, for here the
subject is removed from the sphere of the predicate. Thus too, finally,
3. Allparticular affirmative propositions may be converted simpliciter; for in these
judgments a part of the sphere of the subject has been subsumed under the
predicate, hence a part of the sphere of the predicate may be subsumed under
the subject.
Note i. In universal affirmative judgments the subject is considered as a contentum of the predicate, since it is contained under its sphere. Therefore I 119
may only infer, e.g., All men are mortal, hence some of those who are
contained under the concept mortal are men. The cause of the fact that
universal negative judgments may be converted simpliciter is that two
concepts that contradict one another universally contradict each other in
the same extension.
2. Some universal affirmative judgments may be converted simpliciter, to be
sure. But the ground of this lies not in their form but in the particular
character of their matter; as, e.g., the two judgments, Everything unalterable is necessary, and everything necessary is unalterable.
Ak, "veränderte"; ist ed., "veränderte."
Ak, "Allgemein bejahende"; ist ed., "Allgemein bejahende."
Ak, "allgemein verneinenden"; ist ed., "allgemein verneinenden."
613
§54
4. Inferences of the understanding (in relation to the modality of
judgments) per judicia contraposita
The immediate mode of inference through contraposition consists in that
transposition (metathesis^ of judgments in which merely the quantity remains the same while the quality is altered. They concern only the modality of judgments, since they transform an assertoric into an apodeictic
judgment.
§55
Universal rule of contraposition
With respect to contraposition, the universal rule holds:
All universal affirmative judgments may be contraposed simpliciter. For if
the predicate, as that which contains the subject under itself, is denied,
and hence the whole sphere, then a part of it must also be denied, i.e., the
subject.
Note i. The metathesis^ of judgments through conversion and that through
contraposition are thus opposed to one another to the extent that the
former alters merely quantity, the latter merelyquality.
2. The immediate modes of inference mentioned relate merely to categorical
judgments.
120 II. INFERENCES OF REASON
§56
Inference of reason in general
An inference of reason is the cognition of the necessity of a proposition
through the subsumption of its condition under a given universal rule.
§57
Universal principle of all inferences of reason
The universal principle on which the validity of all inference through
reason rests may be determinately expressed in the following formula:
614
What stands under the condition of a rule also stands under the rule
itself.
Note. The inference of reason premises a universal rule and a subsumption under
its condition. Through this one cognizes the conclusion a priori, not in the
individual, but as contained in the universal and as necessary under a
certain condition. And this, that everything stands under the universal and
is determinable in universal rules, is just the principle of rationality or of
necessity (principium rationalitatis sive necessitatis).
§58
Essential components of the inference of reason
To every inference of reason belong the following essential three parts:
1. a universal rule, which is called the major proposition11 (propositio major),
2. the proposition which subsumes a cognition under the condition of the universal rule, and which is called the minor proposition' (propositio minor), and finally
3. the proposition which affirms or denies the rule's predicate of the subsumed
cognition: the conclusion11 (conclusio).
The first two propositions, in their combination with one another, are 121
called premises.1
Note. A rule is an assertion under a universal condition. The relation of the
condition to the assertion, namely, how the latter stands under the former,
is the exponent^of the rule.
The cognition that the condition (somewhere) exists is the subsumption.
The combination of that which is subsumed under the condition with
the assertion of the rule is the inference.
"Obersatz."
"Untersatz."
"Schlußsatz."
"Vordersätze oder Prämissen."
"Exponent."
615
§59
Matter and form of inferences of reason
The matter of inferences of reason consists in the antecedent propositions or premises, the form in the conclusion insofar as it contains the
consequentia.
Note i. In every inference of reason, then, the truth of the premises is to be
examined first, and then the correctness of the consequentia. In rejecting
an inference of reason, one must never reject the conclusion first, but
rather one must first reject either the premises or the consequentia.
2. In every inference of reason the conclusion is given as soon as the
premises and the consequentia are given.
§60
Division of inferences of reason (as to relation) into categorical,
hypothetical, and disjunctive
All rules (judgments) contain objective unity of consciousness of the
manifold of cognition, hence a condition under which one cognition belongs with another to one consciousness. Now only three conditions of
this unity may be thought, however,namely: as subject of the inherence of
marks, or as ground of the dependence of one cognition on another, or,
finally, as combination of parts in a whole (logical division). Consequently
122 there can only be just as many kinds of universal rules (propositiones majores), through which the consequentia of one judgment from another is
mediated.
And on this is grounded the division of all inferences of reason into
categorical, hypothetical, and disjunäive.
Note i. Inferences of reason can be divided neither as to quantity, for every majorL
is a rule, hence something universal; nor in regard to quality, for it is
equivalent whether the conclusion is affirmative or negative; nor, finally,
in respect of modality, for the conclusion is always accompanied with the
consciousness of necessity and consequently has the dignity of an
apodeictic proposition. Thus only relation remains as the sole possible
ground of division of inferences of reason.
2. Many logicians hold only categorical inferences of reason to be ordinary,
the others to be extraordinary. But this is groundless and false. For all
three of these kinds are products of equally correct, though equally
essentially different functions of reason.
616
§61
Peculiar difference between categorical, hypothetical and disjunctive
inferences of reason
The distinguishing feature among the three mentioned kinds of inferences of reason lies in the major premise. In categorical inferences of reason
the majorL is a categorical proposition, in hypothetical ones it is a hypothetical or problematic proposition, and in disjunctive ones it is a disjunctive
proposition.
§62
i. Categorical inferences of reason
In every categorical inference of reason there are three principal concepts1
(termini), namely:
1. the predicate in the conclusion, which concept is called the major concept11
(terminus major), because it has a larger sphere than the subject,
2. the subject (in the conclusion), whose concept is called the minor concept'
(terminus minor), and
3. a mediating mark (nota intermedia), which is called the middle concept' (terminus 123
medius), because through it a cognition is subsumed under the condition of
the rule.
Note. This distinction among the mentioned termini exists only in categorical
inferences of reason, because these alone infer through a terminus medius;
the others, on the other hand, infer only through the subsumption of a
proposition represented problematically in the majo rL and assertorically in
the minorL.
§63
Principle of categorical inferences of reason
The principle on which the possibility and validity of all categorical inferences of reason rests is this:
What belongs to the mark of a thing belongs also to the thing itself; and what
* "Hauptbegriffe."
* "Oberbegriff."
'"Unterbegriff." >
"Mittelbegriff."
617I M M A N U E L KANT
contradicts the mark of a thing contradicts also the thing itself (nota notae est nota
rei ipsius; repugnans notae, repugnat rei ipsi).
Note. From the principle just set forth the so-called dictum de omni et nullo may
easily be deduced, and hence it can hold as the first principle neither for
inferences of reason in general nor for the categorical in particular.
Genus and species concepts are universal marks of all things that stand
under these concepts. Accordingly, the rule holds here: What belongs toor
contradicts the genus or species belongs to or contradicts all the objects that are
contained under that genus or species. And this rule is called just the dictum
de omni et nullo.
§64
Rulesfor categorical inferences of reason
From the nature and the principle of categorical inferences of reason flow
the following rules for them:
124 i. In no categorical inference of reason can either more or fewer than three
principal concepts (termini) be contained; for here I am supposed to combine
two concepts (subject and predicate) through a mediating mark.
2. The antecedent propositions or premises may not be wholly negative (expuris
negatives nihil sequitur*); for the subsumption in the minor premise must be
affirmative, as that which states that a cognition stands under the condition of
the rule.
3. The premises may also not be wholly particular1 propositions (ex puris particularibus nihil sequitur™); for then there would be no rule, i.e., no universal
proposition, from which a particular cognition could be deduced.
4. The conclusion always follows the weakerpan of the inference, i.e., the negative and
the particular proposition in the premises, as that which is called the weaker
part of the categorical inference of reason (conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem"). If, therefore,
5. one of the premises is a negative proposition, then the conclusion must be
negative too, and
6. if one premise is a particular proposition, then the conclusion must be particular too.
7. In all categorical inferences of reason the majo rL must be a universal proposition (universalis), the minorL an affirmative one (affirmans), and from this it
follows, finally,
From purely negative [premises] nothing follows.
"besondere (particulare)."
From purely particular [premises] nothing follows.
The conclusion follows the weaker part.
618
that the conclusion must follow the major premise in regard to quality, but the
minor premise as to quantity.
Note. It is easy to see that the conclusion must in every case follow the negative
and the particular proposition in the premises.
If I make the minor premise only particular, and say, Some is contained
under the rule, then I can only say in the conclusion that the predicate of
the rule belongs to some, because I have notsubsumed more than this under
the rule. And if I have a negative proposition as the rule (major premise),
then I must also make the conclusion negative. For if the major premise
says that this or that predicate must be denied of everything that stands
under the condition of the rule, then the conclusion must also deny the 125
predicate of that (subject) which has been subsumed under the condition
of the rule.
§65
Pure and mixed categorical inferences of reason
A categorical inference of reason is pure0 (punts) if no immediate inference
is mixed in with it, nor is the legitimate order of the premises altered; in
the contrary case it is called impure or mixed (ratiocinium impurum or
hybridum).
§66
Mixed inferences of reason through conversion of
propositions - Figures
Those inferences which arise through the conversion of propositions and
in which the position of these propositions is thus not the legitimate one
are to be counted as mixed inferences. This case occurs in the three latter
so-called figures of the categorical inference of reason.
§6?
Four figures of inferences
By figures are to be understood those four modes of inferring whose
difference is determined through the particular position of the premises
and their concepts.
Ak, "rein"; ist ed., "rein."
619
§68
126
Ground of the determination of their distinction through the different
position of the middle concept
The middle concept, namely, on whose position things really depend
here, can occupy either (i.) the place of the subject in the major premise
and the place of the predicate in the minor premise, or (2.) the place of the
predicate in both premises, or (3.) the place of the subject in both, or
finally (4.) the place of the predicate in the major premise and the place of
the subject in the minor premise. Through these four cases, the distinction among the four figures is determined. If we let 5signify the subject of
the conclusion, P its predicate, and M the terminus medius, then the
schema for the four mentioned figures may be exhibited in the following
table:
M P
S M
S P
P M
S M
S P
M P
M S
S P
P M
M S
S P
§69
Rulesfor the first figure, as the only legitimate one
The rule of \h&firstfigureis that the major^ be a universal proposition, the
minorL an affirmative. And since this must be the universal rule of all
categorical inferences of reason in general, it results from this that the
first figure is the only legitimate one, which lies at the basis of all the
others, and to which all the others must be traced back through conversion of premises (metathesis praemissorum), insofar as they are to have
validity.
Note. The first figure can have a conclusion of any quantity and quality. In the
other figures there are conclusions only of a certain kind; some modi of
them are excluded here. This already indicates that these figures are not
perfect, thatthereare certainrestrictionsin them which prevent the conclusion from occurring in all modi, as in the first figure.
620
§70
Condition of the reduction of the three latter figures to the first
The condition of the validity of the three latter figures, under which a
correct modus of inference is possible in each of them, amounts to this: 127
that the medius terminus occupies a place such that from it, through
immediate inferences (consequentias immediatas), their position in accordance with the rules of thefirstfigurecan arise. - From this the following
rules for the three latter figures emerge.
Rules of the second figure
In the second figure the minorL stands rightly, hence the majorL must be
converted, and in such a way that it remains universal (universalis). This is
possible only if it is universally negative; but if it is affirmative, then it must
be contraposed. In both cases the conclusion becomes negative (sequitur
partem debiliorem).
Note. The rule of the second figure is, What is contradicted by a mark of a thing
contradicts the thing itself. Now here I must first convert and say, What is
contradicted by a mark contradicts this mark; or I must convert the conclusion, What is contradicted by a mark of a thing is contradicted by the thing
itself, consequently it contradicts the thing.
§72
Rule of the third figure
In the third figure the majorL stands rightly, hence the minorL must be
converted, yet in such a way that an affirmative proposition arises therefrom. This is only possible, however, when the affirmative proposition is
particular, consequently the conclusion is particular.
Note. The rule of the third figure is, What belongs to or contradicts a mark also
belongs to or contradicts some things under which this mark is contained.
Here I must first say, It belongs to or contradicts everything that is contained under this mark.
621
128 §73
Rule of thefourth figure
If in the fourth figure the majorL is universal negative, then it may be
converted purely (simplidter), just as the minorL may be as particular;
hence the conclusion is negative. If, on the other hand, the majorL is
universal affirmative, then it may either be converted only per accidens or it
may be contraposed; hence the conclusion is either particular or negative.
If the conclusion is not to be converted (P S transformed into 5 P), a
transposition of the premises (metathesis praemissorum) or a conversion
(conversio) must occur.
Note. In the fourth figure it is inferred that the predicate depends on the medius
terminus, the medius terminus on the subject (of the conclusion), consequently the subject on the predicate; this simply does not follow, however, but
at most its converse. To make this possible, the majorL must be made the
minorL and vice versa, and the conclusion must be converted, because in the
first alteration the terminus minor is transformed into the majorL.
§74
Universal results concerning the three latter figures
From the rules stated for the three latter figures it is clear
1. that in none of them is there a universal affirmative conclusion, but rather the
conclusion is always either negative or particular;
2. that in every one an immediate inference (consequentia immediatd) is mixed in,
which is not expressly signified, to be sure, but still must be silently included;
that on this account, too,
3. these three latter modi of inference must all be called impure inferences
(ratiocinia hybrida, impurd), not pure ones, since no pure inference can have
more than three principal propositions (termini).
129 §75
2. Hypothetical inferences of reason
A hypothetical inference is one that has a hypothetical proposition as
majorL. Thus it consists of two propositions, (i.) an antecedent propositionp (antecedent) and (2.) a consequent proposition11 (consequens), and
f "Vordersätze.™
q "Nachsatze."
622
here the deduction is either according to modus ponens or to modus
tollens.
Note i. Hypothetical inferences of reason have no medius terminus, then, but
instead the consequentia of one proposition from another is only indicated
in them. In their majorL, namely, the consequentia of two propositions from
one another is expressed, of which the first is the premise, the second a
conclusion. The minorL is a transformation of the problematic condition
into a categorical proposition.
2. From the fact that the hypothetical inference consists only of two propositions, without having a middle concept, it may be seen that it is really not
an inference of reason, but rather only an immediate inference, to be
proved from an antecedent proposition and a consequent proposition, as
to matter or form (consequentia immediata demonstrabilis [ex antecedente et
consequente] vel quoad materiam vel quoad formam).
Every inference of reason is supposed to be a proof. But the hypothetical carries with it only the ground of proof. It is clear from this, consequently, that it cannot be an inference of reason.
§76
Principle of hypothetical inferences
The principle of hypothetical inferences is the principle of the ground-/ a
ratione ad rationatum; a negatione rationati ad negationem rationis valet consequential
§77
3. Disjunctive inferences of reason
In disjunctive inferences, the majorL is a disjunctive proposition and as such
must therefore have members of division or disjunction.
Here we infer either (i.) from the truth of one member of the 130
disjunction to the falsehood of the others, or (2.) from the falsehood of all
members but one to the truth of this one. The former occurs through the
modus ponens (or ponendo tollens), the latter through the modus tollens
(tollendo ponens).
' "Satz desGrundes."
' The consequentia from the ground to the grounded, and from the negation of the
grounded to negation of the ground, is valid.
623I M M A N U E L KANT
Note i. Allthe members of the disjunction but one, taken together, constitute the
contradictory opposite of this one. Here there is a dichotomy, then,
according to which, if one of the two is true, the other must be false, and
conversely.
2. All disjunctive inferences of reason of more than two members of
disjunction are thus really polysyllogistic. For every true disjunction can
only be bimembris, and logical division is also bimembris, but for brevity's
sake the membra subdividentia are posited among the membra dividentia.
§78
Principle of disjunctive inferences of reason
The principle of disjunctive inferences is the principle of the excluded middle:'
A contradictorie oppositorum negatione unius ad affirmationem alterius, a
positione unius ad negationem alterius valet consequential
§79
Dilemma
A dilemma is a hypothetical-disjunctive inference of reason, or a hypothetical inference, whose consequens is a disjunctive judgment. The hypothetical proposition whose consequens is disjunctive is the major proposition; the minor proposition affirms that the consequens (per omnia membra)
is false, and the conclusion affirms that the antecedent is false. (A remotione
consequents ad negationem antecedents valet consequential)
Note. The ancients made a great deal of the dilemma and named this inference
131 comutus. They knew how to drive an opponent into a corner by rehearsing
everything to which he could turn and then contradicting everything, too.
They showed him many difficulties with any opinion he accepted. But it is
a sophistical trick, not to refute propositions directly but rather only to
show difficulties, which is feasible with many, indeed, most things.
Now if we wish to declare as false everything with which we find difficulties, then it is an easy game to reject everything. It is good, to be sure, to
show the impossibility of the opposite, only there still lies something decep-
' "'Grundatz desausschließenden Dritten.™
" From the negation of one contradictory opposite to the affirmation of the other, and from
the positing of one to the negation of the other, the consequentia is valid.
1
From the denial of the consequence to the negation of the antecedent the consequence is
valid.
624
tive in this in case one takes the incomprehensibility of the opposite for its
impossibility. Hence dilemmata have much that is captious in them, even
though they infer correctly. They can be used to defend true propositions,
but also to attack true propositions by means of difficulties that one throws
up against them.
§80
Formal and coven inferences of reason (ratiocinia formalia and
cryptica)
A formal inference of reason is one that not only contains everything
required as to matter but also is expressed correctly and completely as to
form. Opposed to formal inferences of reason are coven ones (cryptica), to
which all those can be reckoned, in which either the premises are transposed, or one of the premises is left out, or, finally, the middle concept
alone is combined with the conclusion. A covert inference of reason of the
second kind, in which one premise is not expressed but only thought, is
called a truncated" one or an enthymeme. Those of the third kind are called
contracted" inferences.
III. INFERENCES OF THE POWER OF JUDGMENT
§81
Determinative and reflective power of judgment
The power of judgment is of two kinds: the determinative11 or the reflective7'
power of judgment. The former goesfrom the universal to theparticular, the
second from the particular to the universal. The latter has only subjective
validity, for the universal to which it proceeds from the particular is only 132
empirical universality - a mere analogue of the logical.
§82
Inferences of the (reflective) power of judgment
Inferences of the power of judgment are certain modes of inference for
coming from particular concepts to universal ones. They are not functions
"verstümmelter."
"zusammengezogene."
"bestimmende."
"reflectirende."
625I M M A N U E L KANT
of the determinative power of judgment, then, but rather of the reflective;
hence they also do not determine the object, but only the mode of reflection
concerning it, in order to attain its cognition.
§83
Principle of these inferences
The principle that lies at the basis of these inferences of the power of
judgment is this: that the many will not agree in one without a common ground,
but rather that which belongs to the many in this way will be necessary due to a
common ground.
Note. Since such a principle lies at the basis of the inferences of the power of
judgment, they cannot, on that account, be held to be immediate inferences.
§84
Induction and analogy — The two modes of inference of the power of
judgment
The power of judgment, by proceedingfrom the particular to the universal in order to draw from experience (empirically) universal - hence not a
priori —judgments,infers either from many to all things of a kind, or from
many determinations and properties, in which things of one kind agree,to
the remaining ones, insofar as they belong to the same principle. The former
mode of inference is called inference through induction, the other inference according to analogy.
133 Note i. Induction infers, then, from the particular to the universal (aparticular? ad
universale) according to the principle of universalization:* What belongs to
many things of a genus belongs to the remaining ones too. Analogy infers from
particular to total similarity of two things, according to the principle of
specification: Things of one genus, which we know to agree in much/ also
agree in what remains, with which we are familiar in some things of this
genus but which we do not perceive in others. Induction extends the
empirically given from the particular to the universal in regard to many
objects, while analogy extends the given properties of one thing to several
[other properties] of the very same thing[.] - One in many, hence in all:
Induction; many in one (which are also in others), hence also what remains
* "Princip der Allgemeinmachung."
* "von denen man vieles Uebereinstimmende kennt."
626
in the same thing: Analogy. Thus the ground of proof for immortality
from the complete .development of natural dispositions of each creature
is, for example, an inference according to analogy.
In the inference according to analogy, however, identity of the ground
(par ratio) is not required. In accordance with analogy we infer only
rational inhabitants of the moon, not men. Also, one cannot infer according to analogy beyond the tertium comparationis.
Every inference of reason must yield necessity. Induction and analogy are
therefore not inferences of reason, but only logical presumptions, or even
empirical inferences; and through induction one does get general propositions, but not universal ones.
The mentioned inferences of the power of judgment are useful and
indispensable for the sake of the extending of our cognition by experience/ But since they give only empirical certainty, we must make use of
them with caution and care.
§85
Simple and composite inferences of reason
An inference of reason is called simple if it consists of one inference of
reason, composite if of several.
§86
Ratiocinatio polysyllogistica
A composite inference, in which the several inferences of reason are
combined with one another not through mere coordination but through
subordination, i.e., as grounds and consequences, is called a chain of 134
inferences of reason (ratiodnatio polysyllogistica).
§8?
Prosyllogisms and episyllogisms
In the series of composite inferences one can infer in two ways, either
from the grounds down to the consequences, or from the consequences
up to the grounds. The first occurs through episyllogisms, the other
through prosyllogisms.
An episyllogism is that inference, namely, in the series of inferences,
whose premise becomes the conclusion of a prosyllogism, hence of an
inference that has the premises of the former as conclusion.
' "Erfahrungserkenntnisses."
627
§88
Sorites or chain inference
An inference consisting of several inferences that are shortened and combined with one another for one conclusion is called a sorites or a chain
inference, which can be either progressive or regressive, accordingly as one
climbs from the nearer grounds up to the more distant ones, or from the
more distant grounds down to the nearer ones.
§89
Categorical and hypothetical sorites
Both progressive and regressive chain inferences can in turn be either
categorical or hypothetical. Theformer consists of categorical propositions, as a
series of predicates, the latter of hypothetical ones, as a series of consequences.
§90
Fallacy —Paralogism - Sophism
An inference of reason that is wrong as to form, although it has for itself
the illusion of a correct inference, is called a fallacy {fallacia). Such an
135 inference is a paralogism insofar as one deceives oneself through it, a
sophism insofar as one intentionally seeks to deceive others through it.
Note. The ancients occupied themselves very much with the art of making such
sophisms. Therefore many of this kind have emerged, e.g., the sophisma
figurae dictionis, in which the medius terminus is taken in different
meanings - fallacia a dicta secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, sophisma
heterozeteseos, elenchid ignorationis,' etc.
§9!
Leap in inference
A leap (saltus) in inference or proof is the combination of a premise with the
conclusion so that the other premise is left out. Such a leap is legitimate
d Reading "elenchi" for "elenchi,".
' the fallacy [ofinferring] from what issaid with qualification to what issaid simpliciter, the
sophism of misdirection, the ignoratio elenchis, etc.
628
(legitimus) if everyone can easily add the missing premise in thought, but
illegitimate (illegitimus) if the subsumption is not clear. Here a distant mark
is connected with a thing without an intermediate mark (nota intermedia).
§92
Petitio principii - Circulus in probando
By a petitio principii is understood the acceptance of a proposition as
ground of proof as an immediately certain proposition, although it still
requires a proof. And one commits a circle in proof if one lays at the basis of
its own proof the very proposition that one wanted to prove.
Note. The circle in proof is often hard to discover, and this mistake is usually
most frequently committed where the proofs are hard.
§93 136
Probatio plus and minus probans
A proof can prove too much, but also too little. In the latter case it proves
only a part of what is to be proved, in the former it also goes on to that
which is false.
Note. A proof that proves too little can be true and thus is not to be rejected. But
if it proves too much, then it proves more than is true, and that is then
false. Thus, for example, the proof against suicide, that he who has not
given life cannot take it either, proves too much; for on this ground we
would not be permitted to kill animals. Thus it is false.
629//. Universal doctrine of method
§94
Manner and method
All cognition, and a whole of cognition, must be in conformity with a rule.
(Absence of rules is at the same time unreason.) But this rule is either that
of manner (free) or that of method (compulsion).
§95
Form of science — Method
Cognition, as science, must be arranged in accordance with a method. For
science is a whole of cognition as a system, and not merely as an aggregate. It therefore requires a systematic cognition, hence one composed in
accordance with rules on which we have reflected.
§96
Doctrine of method —Its object and end
As the doctrine of elements in logic has for its content the elements and
conditions of the perfection of a cognition, so the universal doctrine of
method, as the other part of logic, has to deal with the form of a science in
general, or with the ways of acting so as to connect the manifold of
cognition in a science.
§97
Means for furthering the logical perfection of cognition
The doctrine of method is supposed to expound the way for us to attain
140 the perfection of cognition. Now one of the most essential logical perfections of cognition consists in its distinctness, thoroughness, and systematic ordering into the whole of a science. Accordingly, the doctrine of
630
method will have principally to provide the means through which these
perfections of cognition are furthered.
§98
Conditions of the distinctness of cognition
The distinctness of cognitions and their combination in a systematic
whole depends on the distinctness of concepts both in regard to what is
contained in them and in respect of what is contained under them.
The distinct consciousness of the content of concepts is furthered by
exposition and definition of them, while the distinct consciousness of their
extension, on the other hand, is furthered through logical division of them.
— First of all, then, of the means for furthering the distinctness of concepts in regard to their content.
I. FURTHERING LOGICAL PERFECTION OF
COGNITION THROUGH DEFINITION,
EXPOSITION, AND DESCRIPTION OF CONCEPTS
§99
Definition
A definition is a sufficiently distinct and precise concept (conceptus rei
adaequatus in minimis terminis, complete determinatusf).
Note. The definition alone is to be regarded as a logically perfect concept, for in
it are united the two essential perfections of a concept: distinctness, and
completeness and precision in distinctness (quantity of distinctness).
§100 141
Analytic and synthetic definition
All definitions are either analytic or synthetic. The former are definitions
of a concept that is given, the latter of one that is made.
A concept adequate to the thing, in minimal terms, completely determined.
631
§IOI
Concepts that are given and made a priori and a posteriori
The given concepts of an analytic definition are given either a priori or a
posteriori, just as the concepts of a synthetic definition, which are made,
are made either a priori or a posteriori.
§102
Synthetic definitions through exposition or construction
The synthesis of concepts that are made, out of which synthetic definitions arise, is either that of e3Cpositions (of appearances) or that of construction. The latter is the synthesis of concepts that are made arbitrarily, the
former the synthesis of concepts that are made empirically, i.e., from given
appearances as their matter (conceptus factitii vel a priori vel per synthesin
empiricam1'). Concepts that are made arbitrarily are the mathematical ones.
Note. All definitions of mathematical concepts and - provided that definitions
could exist in the case of empirical concepts - of concepts of experience
must be made synthetically, then. For even in the case of concepts of the
latter kind, e.g., the empirical concepts water, fire, air, etc., I ought not to
analyze what lies in them, but to become acquainted, through experience,
with what belongs to them. All empirical concepts must thus be regarded as
concepts that are made, whose synthesis is not arbitrary, however, but
empirical
§103
Impossibility of empirically synthetic definitions
Since the synthesis of empirical concepts is not arbitrary but rather is
142 empirical and as such can never be complete (because one can always
discover in experience more marks of the concept), empirical concepts
cannot be defined, either.
Note. Thus only arbitrary concepts may be defined synthetically. Such definitions of arbitrary concepts, which are not only always possible but also
necessary, and which must precede all that is said by means of an arbitrary
* "Exposition."
h
concepts that are made either a priori or through empirical synthesis.
632
concept, could also be called declarations, insofar as through them one
declares his thoughts or gives account of what one understands by a word.
This is the case among mathematicians.
§104
Analytic definitions through analysis of concepts given a priori or a
posteriori
All given concepts, be they given a priori or a posteriori, can be defined only
through analysis. For one can make given concepts distinct only insofar as
one successively makes their marks clear. If all the marks of a given
concept are made clear, then the concept becomes completely distinct; if it
does not contain too many marks, then it is at the same time precise, and
from this there arises a definition of the concept.
Note. Since one cannot become certain through any test whether one has exhausted all the marks of a given concept through a complete analysis, all
analytic definitions are to be held to be uncertain.
§105
Expositions and descriptions
Not all concepts can be defined, and not all need to be.
There are approximations to the definition of certain concepts; these
are partly expositions' (expositiones), partly descriptions (descriptions).
The expounding' of a concept consists in the connected (successive) 143
representation* of its marks, insofar as these are found through analysis.
Description is the exposition of a concept, insofar as it is not precise.
Note i. We can expound either a concept or experience. The first occurs through
analysis, the second through synthesis.
2. Exposition occurs only with given concepts, then, which are thereby made
distinct; it is thereby distinct from declaration, which is a distinct representation of concepts that are made.
Since it is not always possible to make analysis complete, and since in
general an analysis must first be incomplete before it becomes complete,
an incomplete exposition, as part of a definition, is also a true and useful
' "Erörterungen"
'"Exponiren."*
"in der an einander hängenden (successiven) Vorstellung."
633
exhibition of a concept. Definition always remains here only the idea of a
logical perfection that we must seek to attain.
j. Description can occur only with empirically given concepts. It has no
determinate rules and contains only the materials for definition.
§106
Nominal and real definitions
By mere definitions of names,1 or nominal definitions, are to be understood
those that contain the meaning that one wanted arbitrarily to give to a
certain name, and which therefore signify only the logical essence of their
object, or which serve merely for distinguishing it from other objects.
Definitions of things,"1 or real definitions, on the other hand, are ones that
suffice for cognition of the object according to its inner determinations,
since they present the possibility of the object from inner marks.
Note i. If a concept is internally sufficent for distinguishing the thing then it
certainly is externally sufficient too, but if it is not internally sufficient
then it can be externally sufficient merely in a certain relation, namely, in
the comparison of the definitum with other things. But unrestricted external sufficiency is not possible without internal sufficiency.
144 2. Objects of experience allow only nominal explanations. Logical nominal
definitions of given concepts of the understanding are derived from an
attribute, real definitions, on the other hand, from the essence of the
thing, the first ground of possibility. Thus the latter contain what always
belongs to die thing - its real essence. Merely negative definitions cannot
be called real definitions either, because negative marks can serve just as
well as affirmative ones for distinguishing one thing from others, but not
for cognition of the thing according to its inner possibility.
In matters of morals real definitions must always be sought; all our
striving must be directed toward this. There are real definitions in mathematics, for the definition of an arbitrary concept is always real.
j. Adefinition isgeneticifityields a concept dirough which the object can be
exhibited a priori in concreto; all mathematical definitions are of this sort.
§107
Principal requirements of definition
The essential and universal requirements that pertain to the completeness
of a definition in general may be considered under the four principal
moments of quantity, quality, relation, and modality:
' "Namen-Erklärungen."
m "Sach-Erklarungen."
634
as to quantity - what concerns the sphere of the definition - the definition
and the definitum must be convertible concepts" (conceptus redprocf), and hence
the definition must be neither broader nor narrower than its definitum;
as to quality, the definition must be a detailed and at the same time precise
concept,
as to relation, it must not be tautological, i.e., the marks of the definitum must,
as grounds of its cognition, be different from it itself, and finally
as to modality, the marks must be necessary, and hence not such as are added
through experience.
Note. The condition that the genus concept and the concept of the specific
difference (genus and differentia specified) ought to constitute the definition
holds only in regard to nominal definitions in comparison, but not for real 145
definitions in derivation.
§108
Rulesfor testing definitions
In the testing of definitions four acts are to be performed; it is to be
investigated, namely, whether the definition
1. considered as a proposition is true, whether
2. as a concept it is distinct,
3. whether as a distinct concept it is also detailed, and finally whether
4. as a detailed concept it is at the same time determinate, i.e., adequate to the
thing itself.
§109
Rulesfor preparation of definitions
The very same acts that belong to the testing of definition are also to be
performed in the preparation of them. Toward this end, then, seek (i.)
true propositions, (2.)whose predicate does not presuppose the concept
of the diing; (3.) collect several of them and compare them with the
concept of the thing itself to see if they are adequate; and finally (4.) see
whether one mark does not lie in another or is not subordinated to it.
Note i. These rules hold, as is surely understood without any reminder, only of
analytic definitions. But now since one can never be certain here whether
the analysis has been complete, one may put forth the definition only as
" " Wechselbegriffe."
635I M M A N U E L KANT
an experiment and make use of it only as if it were not a definition. Under
this restriction one can still use it as a distinct and true concept and draw
corollaries from the concept's marks. I will be able to say, namely, that to
that to which the concept of the definitum belongs, the definition belongs
too, but of course not conversely, since the definition does not exhaust
the whole definitum.
To make use of the concept of the definitum in the explanation, or to
make the definitum the basis of the definition, is called explaining through
a circle (drculus in definiendo).
146 II. FURTHERING THE PERFECTION
OF COGNITION THROUGH LOGICAL DIVISION
OF CONCEPTS
§110
Concept of logical division
Every concept contains a manifold under itself insofar as the manifold
agrees, but also insofar as it is different. The determination of a concept
in regard to everything possible that is contained under it, insofar as
things are opposed to one another, i.e., are distinct from one another, is
called the logical division of the concept. The higher concept is called the
divided concept (divisus), the lower concepts the members of the division
(membra dividentia).
Note i. To take apart' a concept and to divide? it are thus quite different things. In
taking a concept apart I see what is contained in it (through analysis), in
dividing it I consider what is contained under it. Here I divide the sphere
of the concept, not the concept itself. Thus it is a great mistake to
suppose that division is the taking apart of the concept; rather, the members of the division contain more in themselves than does the divided
concept.
2. We go up from lower to higher concepts, and afterward we can go down
from these to the lower ones - through division.
§in
Universal rules of logical division
In every division of a concept we must see to it:
' "theilen."
f "eintheilen."
636
1. that the members of the division exclude or are opposed to one another, that
furthermore they
2. belong under one higher concept (conceptus communis), and finally that
3. taken together they constitute the sphere of the divided concept or are equal
to it.
Note. The members of the division must be separated from one another through 147
contradictory opposition, not through mere contrariety* (contrarium).
§112
Codivision and subdivision
Various divisions of a concept, which are made in various respects, are
called codivisions, and division of the members of division is called a
subdivision (mbdivisio).
Note i. Subdivision can be carried on to infinity, but comparatively it can be
finite. Codivision, especially with concepts of experience, always goes to
infinity; for who can exhaust all the relations of concepts?
2. Codivision can also be called a division according to the variety of concepts of the same object (viewpoints), as subdivision can be called a
division of the viewpoints themselves.
§"3
Dichotomy and polytomy
A division into two members is called dichotomy; but if it has more than two
members, it is called polytomy.
Note i. Allpolytomy is empirical; dichotomy is the only division from principles a
priori, hence the only primitive division. For the members of a division are
supposed to be opposed to one another, but for each A the opposite is
nothing more than nonA.
2. Polytomy cannot be taught in logic, for it involves cognition of the object.
Dichotomy requires only the principle of contradiction, however, without
being acquainted, as to content, with the concept one wants to divide.
Polytomy requires intuition, either a priori, as in mathematics (e.g., in the
division of conic sections), or empirical intuition, as in description of
nature. However, division based on the principle of synthesis' a priori has
* "Widerspiel."
' "Princip der Synthesis."
637I M M A N U E L KANT
148 trichotomy, namely: (i.) the concept as condition, (2.) the conditioned,
and (3.) the derivation of the latter from the former.
§"4
Various divisions of method
Now as for what concerns in particular method itself in working up and
treating scientific cognitions, there are various principal kinds of it, which
we can present in accordance with the following division.
i. Scientific orpopular method
Scientific1 or scholastic method differs from popular method through the
fact that the former proceeds from basic and elementary propositions,
but the latter from the customary and the interesting. The former aims
for thoroughness and thus removes everything foreign, the latter aims at
entertainment.
Note. These two methods differ as to kind, then, and not merely as to exposition,
and popularity in method is hence something other than popularity in
exposition.
§n6
2. Systematic orfragmentary method
Systematic method is opposed to fragmentary or rhapsodic method. If one
has thought in accordance with a method and then also expressed this
method in the exposition, and if the transition from one proposition to
another is distinctly presented, then one has treated a cognition systematically. If, on the other hand, one has thought according to a method but has
not arranged the exposition methodically, such a method is to be called
rhapsodic.
Note. Systematic exposition is opposed to the fragmentary as methodical exposition
149 is to the tumultuous. He who thinks methodically can expound systemati-
"scientifische."
638
cally or fragmentarily, that is. Exposition that is outwardly fragmentary but
in itself methodical is aphoristic.
§"7
3. Analytic or synthetic method
Analytic is opposed to synthetic method. The former begins with the conditioned and grounded and proceeds to principles (a prindpiatis ad prindpia), while the latter goes from principles to consequences or from the
simple to the composite. The former could also be called regressive,as the
latter could progressive.
Note. Analytic method is also called the method of invention. Analytic method is
more appropriate for the end of popularity, synthetic method for the end of
scientific and systematic preparation of cognition.
§118
4. Syllogistic [or] tabular method
Syllogistic method is that according to which a science is expounded in a
chain of inferences.
That method in accordance with which a finished system is exhibited in
its complete connection is called tabular.
§"9
Sf.Acroamatic or erotematic method
Method is acroamatic insofar as someone only teaches, erotematic insofar as
he asks as well. The latter method can be divided in turn into dialogic or
Socratic method and catechistic method, accordingly as the questions are
directed either to the understanding or merely to memory.
Note. One cannot teach erotematically except through the Socratic dialogue, in
which both must ask and also answer one another in turn, so that it seems 150
as if the pupil is also himself teacher. The Socratic dialogue teaches, that
is, through questions, by acquainting the learner with his own principles of
reason and sharpening his attention to them. Through common catechism,
however, one cannot teach but can only elicit what one has taught
acroamatically. Catechistic method also holds, then, only for empirical and
historical cognitions, while the dialogic holds for rational cognitions.
639I M M A N U E L KANT
§120
Meditation
By meditation is to be understood reflection, or methodical thought. Meditation must accompany all reading and learning, and for this it is requisite
that one first undertake provisional investigations and then put his
thoughts in order, or connect them in accordance with a metho