Preface
[Kant launches this work by
distinguishing two senses of the word ‘nature’. There is
(n) its use in phrases of the form ‘the nature of. . . ’, where
a nature is a quality, and (N) its use as a proper name,
‘Nature’, which signifies not a quality but the sum-total of
everything that can be an object of our senses and thus also
an object of experience. Kant also lingers on (n) in order to
distinguish ‘the nature of. . . ’ from ‘the essence of. . . , but
this won’t concern us in the present work, whose central
concern is with (N) Nature—the whole world that we can
know about through our senses. [Because he was writing in
German, Kant had to use a capital ‘N’ for Natur in each of those senses.
In English we have a choice; and this version will use ‘nature’ for the
‘nature of . . . ’ concept and ‘Nature’ for the name of a single entity.]]
Kant continues:] Nature taken in this sense of the word has
two main parts, corresponding to the main line through our
senses:
One part contains the objects of the •external senses.
Any theory about that will be a doctrine of •body,
dealing with extended Nature.
The other part contains the object of the •internal
sense. Any theory about it will be a doctrine of •soul,
dealing with thinking Nature.
[Kant’s Lehre has to be translated as ‘doctrine’, but really that is misleading. He will label as a Lehre any disciplined body of fact-and-theory
about a given subject; any respectable university department will be
dedicated to some Lehre; but a Lehre can be much too small to support a
department—e.g. Kant will speak about ‘the doctrine of the properties of a
straight line’!] If a doctrine is a system—i.e. a knowledge-total
ordered according to principles—then it’s what we call a
science. Now, there are two sorts of principles that can
connect items of knowledge so that they constitute a whole:468
•empirical principles and •rational principles. This could
prompt us to distinguish ‘historical natural science’ from
‘rational natural science’; but it turns out that this is a bad
way of stating things. [Kant’s explanation of why is confusing:
he announces it as focussing on the meaning of ‘Nature’ but
states it in terms of the meaning of ‘science’. [We’ll see that
both items are involved.] The core of the explanation is that
any natural science, properly so-called, must include principles that rationally hold items of knowledge together. Kant
continues:] So the doctrine of Nature—whether extended or
thinking—might better be divided into
(a) the historical doctrine of Nature, which contains
nothing but the systematically ordered facts about
natural things—presenting •Nature as a system of
classes of natural things ordered according to similarities, and the •history of Nature as a systematic
account of natural things in different times and in
different places; and (b) natural science.
And natural science properly so-called would treat its subjectmatter wholly according to a priori principles, while natural
science improperly so-called would treat its subject-matter
according to laws of experience.
Nothing counts as science proper unless it is •apodeictically
certain, ·i.e. certain because it is absolutely necessary·; any
cognitive structure that makes use of merely •empirical
certainty is only improperly called ‘science’. . . . An example
of the latter is chemistry, the basic premises of which are
merely empirical; the laws from which the given facts are
logically deduced in chemistry are merely laws of experience,
which •don’t bring with them any consciousness of their
necessity and therefore •aren’t apodeictically certain. So
that entire structure doesn’t strictly count as a ‘science’,
and would be better referred to as a systematic art. [This uses
‘art’, as Kant uses the corresponding word Kunst, to mean something like
1  Preface
‘disciplined assemblage of skills’.]
So a rational doctrine of Nature deserves the label ‘natural science’ only when the laws of Nature that underlie it
are (1) known a priori and aren’t mere (2) laws of experience. Knowledge of Nature of kind (1) is called pure rational
knowledge; knowledge of kind (2) is called applied rational
knowledge. Since the word ‘Nature’ already carries with it
the concept of laws, and since that carries with it the concept
469 of. . . .necessity, it’s easy to see •why something can count
as natural science only because of the pure part of it, i.e.
the part containing the a priori principles of all the other
explanations of Nature, and •why it’s only because of this
pure part that it is a science. Thus, every discipline dealing
with Nature must, according to reason’s demands, eventually
come to be natural science, because the very concept of
Nature has the necessity of laws inseparably attached to it
and required for Nature to be thoroughly understood. [•This
removes the confusion mentioned in an earlier note. Kant holds that both
the concepts of Nature and those of science conceptually involve necessary law; so any disciplined treatment of Nature must bring in such laws,
thereby helping to qualify itself as a science. •Why ‘reason’s demands’?
Because of Kant’s doctrine—expounded in his Critique of Pure Reason but
not here—that reason constantly urges us to interconnect our various
items of knowledge, always restlessly trying to get it all into a single
rigidly interconnected system.] That is why the most complete
explanation of certain phenomena by chemical principles
always leaves us dissatisfied, because it has involved only
contingent laws learned by mere experience, with no input
from anything a priori.
Thus all genuine natural science requires a pure part
which could be the basis for the apodeictic certainty that
reason looks for in such science. And since the principles
at work in the pure part make it completely different from
the part whose principles are only empirical, there is a lot
to be gained from a procedure in which the empirical part is
kept out of sight while we expound the pure part on its own,
as completely as we possibly can, so as to discover exactly
•what reason can accomplish unaided, and •where it starts
to need help from principles of experience. . . . ·And now I
need to introduce another distinction·:
•Pure philosophy (= metaphysics) is pure rational
knowledge from mere concepts; •Mathematics is pure
rational knowledge that is based entirely on the construction of concepts by means of the presentation of
the object in a priori intuition.
[That account of mathematics comes from a theory of Kant’s which is
easiest to grasp in application to geometry. Take the proposition that the
total length of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the length of the
third side; how do you know that this is true? Not empirically, by (1)
measuring the sides of triangular things, or by (2) reading it off from the
concept triangle.
By method (1) we could only get truths known a posteriori, i.e.
from experience.
By method (2) we could only derive analytic truths—ones knowable through conceptual analysis.
What is remarkable about geometrical truths is that they are known a
priori and yet are synthetic—i.e. known without appeal to experience
but not by being derived purely from concepts. Well, then, how are
they known? Kant’s answer is this: If you know that proposition about
triangles (and haven’t merely taken it on trust from someone else), you
must have constructed a triangle in your mind’s eye and seen from this
that the proposition is true. In our present text Kant writes here and
below of ‘constructing concepts’, but that is misleading. He doesn’t think
that in this process you construct any concept. Rather, you construct,
under the guidance of a concept, a mental triangle.] Natural science
properly so-called presupposes the metaphysics of Nature,
·i.e. pure rational knowledge from mere concepts·. Why? Because a science properly so-called has to include necessary
propositions, and in this science they must be necessary
truths having to do with the existence of things; so they can’t
2  Preface
be based on a priori intuition, because no such intuition
can present anything concerning existence. The necessary
propositions involved in natural science, therefore, have to be
the concept-based ones that define ‘metaphysics of Nature’.
There are two possibilities for what they might be:
(1) The metaphysics of Nature might deal with the laws
that make possible the concept of a thing’s nature, without
bringing in any specific object of experience, and therefore
not saying anything specific about any particular kinds of
empirical object. The part of the metaphysics of Nature that
470 does this is its transcendental part. [For Kant a ‘transcendental’
principle is one that has to do with the conditions that make possible
some kind of knowledge.]
(2) The metaphysics of Nature might instead deal with
the special nature of this or that kind of thing, of which it
has an empirical concept; doing this in such a way it doesn’t
look to experience for anything except this concept. (·If it
looked to experience for information, it wouldn’t count as
‘metaphysics’·.) For example, it takes as its foundation the
empirical concept of a material thing or the empirical concept
of a thinking thing, and searches for anything that reason
can teach us a priori regarding these things. This science
would still count as a ‘metaphysic’ of Nature—specifically, of
corporeal or of thinking Nature—but it wouldn’t be a •general
metaphysic but rather •a special metaphysical natural science (physics and psychology), in which the transcendental
principles mentioned in (1) are applied to the two sorts of
sense-objects.
In any special doctrine of Nature there is only as much
genuine science as there is mathematics. As I have explained,
a science (properly so-called) of Nature must have a pure
part that is the foundation for the empirical part and is based
upon a priori knowledge of natural things. ·Let us now look
very carefully into this notion of a priori knowledge of natural
things·. To know something a priori is to know it from its
mere possibility. But the possibility of specific natural things
·such as bodies and minds· can’t be discovered from their
mere concepts. ·For example·: from the concept of body
we can discover the possibility of having a self-consistent
thought about a body, but we can’t discover the possibility
of a body as a natural thing that could exist outside of
the thought of it. So if we are to have knowledge of the
possibility of specific kinds of natural things, and hence to
know ·truths about· them a priori, we’ll need to be given
a priori an intuition corresponding to the concept, i.e. we
need the concept to be constructed. And rational knowledge
through the construction of concepts is mathematical. It may
be possible to dispense with mathematics in developing a
•pure philosophy of Nature in general, i.e. one whose only
topic is what constitutes the concept of a nature in general;
but a pure doctrine of Nature concerning specific natural
things (a doctrine of body or a doctrine of soul) is possible
only through mathematics. . . .
[That’s why chemistry can’t be a science, Kant says. For
it to be a science it would have to derive chemical laws about 471
how different sorts of matter react with one another from
an a priori intuition—something constructed in our minds.
And there is no chance of that. And so, Kant continues,]
chemistry can’t be anything more than a systematic art or
experimental doctrine, never a science proper, because the
principles of chemistry are merely empirical and can’t be
presented a priori in intuition. . . .
But the empirical study of the soul must always be even
further from qualifying as a natural science than chemistry
is. Why? Because mathematics can’t be applied to the
phenomena of inner sense and their laws. (‘But the flow of
inner sense’s internal changes is continuous, and continuity
can be treated mathematically.’ Yes, but •what that could
3  Preface
add to the content of the doctrine of the soul is vastly less
than •what mathematics can add to the content of the
doctrine of body; in about the way that •the doctrine of
the properties of a straight line are less than •the whole
of geometry! In each case, the tiny doctrine concerns only
a single dimension—in the case of the soul it’s the single
dimension of time.) Anyway, if we ·keep mathematics out of
the picture and· think of the doctrine of the soul merely as as
a •systematic art of analysis or as an •experimental doctrine,
it still falls wells short of chemistry, ·in three ways·. (i) Given
any two elements in the complex of events observed through
inner sense, I can think of them them separately, but I can’t
separate them and then bring them together as I choose. (ii)
I can’t investigate the mental events in someone else’s mind.
(iii) With mental events, ·unlike chemical ones·, an observed
event can be altered and distorted by the mere fact of being
observed. So the doctrine of the soul can’t be anything more
than . . . . a •natural description of the soul, not a •science of
it, and not even a •psychological experimental doctrine. That
is why in the title of this work—which really contains only the
principles of the doctrine of body—I have followed standard
usage in employing the general name ‘natural science’; for
strictly speaking it’s only the doctrine of body that is entitled
to be called ‘science’.
472 But it can’t be natural science unless mathematics is
brought into it, and that can’t happen until. . . .a complete
analysis of the absolutely general concept of matter has been
provided. Providing that is the business of pure philosophy.
That general concept is an empirical one, but pure philosophy ·in dealing with it· doesn’t make use of any particular
experiences; it employs only what it finds in the concept of
matter that relates to pure space and time. (Such relations
come from laws that depend essentially on the concept of
Nature.) Such a doctrine of body is, therefore, an actual
metaphysics of corporeal Nature.
So all natural philosophers who have wanted to proceed
mathematically in their work have availed themselves (without realizing it) of metaphysical principles; they had to do
so, despite their solemn declarations that metaphysics has
no claims on their science. No doubt they took ‘metaphysics’
to be a light-minded activity of •inventing possibilities at will
and •playing with concepts which might be incapable of being
presented in intuition and have as their only claim to objective reality the mere fact that they aren’t self-contradictory!
All true metaphysics comes from the essential nature of our
thinking faculty, so it’s not something we invent. The content
of metaphysics doesn’t come from experience; ·it’s nearer
the truth to say that experience comes from metaphysics!·.
Metaphysics consists in the pure operations of thought—a
priori concepts and principles whose basic role is to bring the
elements of the tangle of empirical representations into lawful connection with one another, thereby turning the tangle
into experience. That’s why those mathematical physicists
couldn’t do without some metaphysical principles, including the ones that make the concept of their own special
object—matter—available a priori for application to external
experience, as with the concepts of motion, of the filling of
space, of inertia, and so on. But they rightly held that the
apodeictic certainty they wanted their natural laws to have
couldn’t be had by any merely empirical principles; so they
preferred to postulate such laws without investigating their
a priori sources.
In the pure part of natural science as ordinarily conducted, metaphysical and mathematical constructions crisscross with one another; ·and that is very unsatisfactory·. It
is enormously beneficial for the sciences to keep principles of
different kinds at a distance from each other, putting •each 473
kind into a separate system which constitutes a science
4  Preface
of •that kind. If this isn’t done, people can confuse them
with one another, failing to see which kind is relevant to
a particular problem. . . . That is why I have thought it
necessary to segregate •metaphysical principles from the
pure part of natural science that has usually been the
stamping-ground of metaphysical as well as mathematical
constructions, putting •them into a system of their own—a
system that will also contain the principles of the construction of those ·mathematical· concepts, and therefore the
principles of the possibility of a mathematical doctrine of
Nature itself. ·But this system won’t contain any mathematics·. . . .
Here is a second advantage of this procedure. In anything
that is called ‘metaphysics’ we can hope for absolute completeness, which can’t be expected in any other branch of
knowledge; and we can confidently expect such completeness
not only for the metaphysics of Nature in general but also
for our present topic of the metaphysics of corporeal Nature.
Why can we expect this? Because in metaphysics the object—
·the item you are studying·—is considered merely as it has
to be represented in accordance with the universal necessary
laws of thought; this confines the possible results to a
definite number of items of knowledge, and it’s possible to
come to have all of these. In contrast with this, in any other
science we consider the object as it has to be represented in
accordance with data of intuition; there is a limitless web
of intuitions, and therefore of objects of thought, so that
the science can never achieve absolute completeness, but
can be endlessly extended, as in pure mathematics and the
empirical doctrine of Nature. [In that sentence, Kant twice specifies
that the intuitions he is talking about include pure as well as empirical
ones.] I think that ·in the present work· I completely exhaust
the metaphysical doctrine of body, extend it as far as you
like; but I don’t regard that as much of an achievement.
The schema for the completeness of a metaphysical system, whether of Nature in general or of corporeal Nature in
particular, is the table of the categories.1 That is because this 474
1 [In an enormous footnote Kant reports that something published in a
recent issue of one of the learned journals expresses doubts relating
to his use of his ‘table of the pure concepts of the understanding’. He
continues:] The doubts aren’t aimed at the table itself, but at the conclusions I have drawn from it regarding the limitations of the whole
faculty of pure reason and therefore of all metaphysics. . . . These
doubts are supposed to touch the main foundation of my system,
as set out in the Critique of Pure Reason. . . . This main foundation
is said ·by my critic· to be my deduction of the pure concepts of
the understanding, expounded partly in the Critique and partly in
the Prolegomena. That part of the Critique (·says my critic·) should
have been the clearest but is actually the most obscure or indeed
argues in a circle, and so on. The chief point in these objections is
the claim that without a completely clear and adequate deduction of
the categories, the system of the Critique of Pure Reason, far from
being apodeictically certain, would totter on its foundation; and that
is what I shall answer here. [Kant’s answer is long, dense, difficult,
and not needed for present purposes. The gist of it involves his
taking his critic to agree •that the categories are forms of thought
that we have to use in intellectually dealing with whatever we have
to think about, and •that all we can ever have to think about are
appearances. These concessions, Kant says, give him his core thesis
in theCritique, namely that the categories represent the limits to
what thoughts we can have, what propositions we can entertain, and
so on; and he represents his critic as accepting that the categories do
this while complaining that Kant hasn’t explained how they can do it.
He replies that his system doesn’t need thehow, which is mere icing
on the cake [not his formulation!]. He says that if his account of how
were a failure, he would still be in good company:] Newton’s system
of universal gravitation is well established, despite our continuing
difficulty about explaining how attraction at a distance is possible.
Difficulties are not doubts. [And then Kant re-states all this at much
greater length, ending up with a slap at his critic, saying that when
certain things are made clearer in the second edition of the Critique,]
that will spare my critic from having to resort to a pre-established
harmony because of the surprising agreement of appearances with
the laws of the understanding. This ‘remedy’ is much worse than the
5  Preface
table contains all the pure concepts of the understanding
that have something to do with the nature of things. It
475 must be possible to bring under the four kinds of category—quantity, quality, relation, and modality—all detailed
476 special cases of the universal concept of matter, and therefore
everything that
can be •thought a priori concerning matter, •presented
in mathematical constructions, or •given in experience
as a determinate object of experience.
There’s nothing more to be discovered or added; but there
may be room for improvements in clearness or thoroughness.
Accordingly, the present work contains four chapters,
each dealing with matter brought under one of the four
kinds of concepts of the understanding. Something that
is present in all the chapters is motion. The senses can’t
be affected by matter unless something moves; so motion
is the basic fact about anything that is to be an object of
the external senses; and the understanding leads all other
477 predicates that express the nature of matter back to motion;
so natural science is, throughout, either a pure or an applied
doctrine of motion. The Metaphysical Foundations of Natural
evil it is meant to cure. . . . Such a pre-established harmony can’t
generate the objective necessity that characterizes the principles in
which pure concepts of the understanding are applied to appearances. For example, it provides no basis for cause-effect connections
to be objectively necessary (though it allows subjective necessity
(·when we experience C we can’t help expecting E to follow·). The only
possible basis for this objective necessity is the a priori principles
that lie at the foundation of the possibility of thought itself, these
being needed if we are to have knowledge of objects whose appearance is given us, i.e. if we are to be able to have experience. And
even if there could be no adequate explanation of how experience is
possible in the first place, it would still be indisputably certain that
experience is possible only through those concepts and, conversely,
that the only meaningful use for those concepts is in relation to
objects of experience.
Science can therefore be divided into four chapters.
1. Phoronomy: In this, motion is considered as pure
quantum—portions of which can be combined in various
ways—with no attention being paid to any quality of the
matter that moves. [See note on page 18]
2. Dynamics: This treats motion as belonging to the quality
of the matter under the label ‘basic moving force’. [See note on
page 39]
3. Mechanics: This deals with how the movements of
portions of matter bring them into ·causal· relations with
one another. [See page 58]
4. Phenomenology: In this chapter, matter’s motion or
rest is handled purely in terms of how it is represented—its
modality—and thus in terms of its status as an appearance
of the external senses. [See note on page 62]
I have shown the necessity of distinguishing •the metaphysical foundations of the doctrine of body not only from
•physics (which employs empirical principles) but even from
•physics’s rational premises, which concern the employment
of mathematics in physics. The reasons for that were internal
to metaphysics; but there’s also an external reason to deal
thoroughly with the doctrine of body as a separate unit, not
mixing it up with the general system of metaphysics. This
external reason is only accidental—·it depends on a sheer
fact about how certain people behave·—but it is important.
We can mark the boundaries of a science not merely in terms
of •its subject-matter and of •the specific kind of knowledge
of that subject-matter, but also in terms of •what those
who pursue the science have in mind as a use for it. Well,
what do all the people who have busied their heads with
metaphysics—and will continue to do so —had in mind as a
use for it? They have planned for it to
•extend natural knowledge
(which they could do much more easily and certainly by
6  
observation, experiment, and the application of mathematics
to external phenomena), and also to
•give them knowledge of what lies entirely beyond all
the boundaries of experience, namely God, freedom,
and immortality.
These things being so, there is a lot to be gained by handling
the metaphysics of the doctrine of body in isolation from
the rest of metaphysics ·rather than letting it get caught
up in that jumble of concerns·. It does in fact grow from
general metaphysics, and that shouldn’t be forgotten; but
it will grow better if we treat it as having been planted in
its own ground. This won’t affect the completeness of the
system of •general metaphysics. It will indeed make it easier
for •this science to progress smoothly towards its goal if,
478 whenever it needs to bring in the general doctrine of body,
it can call upon the separate system of such a doctrine
without having had to include it in its baggage all along. And
there’s another significant fact (which I can’t go into in detail
here), namely that general metaphysics, whenever it needs
to provide examples (intuitions) to give meaning to its pure
concepts of the understanding, always has to take them
from the general doctrine of body, i.e. from the form and
principles of external intuition. And when such examples
are not ready at hand, general metaphysics gropes, shaking
with uncertainty, among mere meaningless concepts. . . . So
a separate metaphysics of corporeal Nature does excellent
and indispensable service to general metaphysics . . . . In
the present work I have modelled my procedure on the
mathematical method —not making my work strictly mathematical (I hadn’t time for that), but treating mathematics
as something to imitate. This isn’t meant as a display of
profundity that might earn the work a better reception.
Rather, it reflects my belief that a system such as this is
quite capable of a mathematical treatment, and that it may
some day be completed by someone cleverer than I am. That
could happen when mathematical investigators of Nature,
stimulated by this sketch of mine, think it worthwhile to
extend their studies to the metaphysical portion ·of the
doctrine of body· . . . . and to bring it into unison with the
mathematical doctrine of motion.
In the preface of his Principia, Newton follows up his
remark that geometry needs to postulate only two mechanical
actions, the ones that trace a straight line and a circle, by
saying: ‘Geometry is prioud of being able to produce so much,
with so little taken from elsewhere.’ In contrast with that,
one might say of metaphysics: It stands astonished that with
so much offered to it by pure mathematics, it can achieve so 479
little! Nevertheless, this ‘little’ is something that mathematics
absolutely has to have in its application to natural science;
and since mathematics must here necessarily borrow from
metaphysics, it shouldn’t be ashamed to be seen in the
company of the latter. [From here on, displayed occurrences of ‘Definition’ translate Kant’s Erklärung, which usually means ‘explanation’.
Kant hinself licenses this somewhat loose use of ‘definition’ in his Critique
of Pure Reason B 75.]
Chapter 1
Metaphysical Foundations of Phoronomy
Definition 1
I call something ‘material’ if and only if it is movable in 480
space. Any space that is movable is what we call ‘material’ or ‘relative’ space. What we think of as the space in
which all motion occurs—space that is therefore absolutely
immovable—is called ‘pure’ space or ‘absolute’ space.
Remark 1
7  
The whole topic of phoronomy is motion; so the only property
that is here attributed to the subject of motion, i.e. matter,
is its movability. So we are free to take ·any portion of·
matter as a point. In phoronomy we set aside all the internal
characteristics of matter, thereby setting aside anything
involving the quantitative notion of how much matter we
are dealing with; all we are concerned with is the motion of
matter, and the only quantitative notion that we need is not
how much matter but only how fast and in what direction the
matter moves. [Why does Kant imply that direction-of-movement is
quantitative? Because he is thinking of 180-degree changes of direction
of straight-line movements; an N movement in one direction can be
thought of as a minus-N movement in the opposite direction.] If I
sometimes use the expression ‘body’—·meaning a body, not
merely undifferentiated matter·—that will be because I am
deliberately getting ahead of myself, making my discourse
less abstract and more comprehensible by bringing into
phoronomy some of the more determinate concepts of matter
that we shall come to later.
Remark 2
481 If I explain the concept of matter not by a predicate that
applies to it as object—
·i.e. not by saying anything of the form ‘any item is
matter if it has property P·’
—but only by how it relates to the knowledge-faculty through
which it is basically represented to me—
·i.e. by saying ‘matter is whatever is represented to
me by outer sense’·
—then ‘matter’ is being explained as applying to every object
of the external senses; and this would be the mere metaphysical definition of it. But space would be simply the form of all
external sensible intuition. . . . [That last phrase refers to the use
of our senses in application to the external world; it stands in contrast
with a priori intuition—see the long note on page 2.] In contrast to
this form, matter would be what our outer senses give us
sensations of ; so it would be the properly empirical part of
external sensory intuition, because matter cannot be given
at all a priori. In all experience •something must be sensed,
and •this is the real component in sensible intuition. So
the space in which we are to set up experience concerning
motions must also be perceptible, i.e. must be indicated by
what is perceptible; and this space—
the sum-total of all objects of experience, and itself an
object of experience
—is called ‘empirical space’. Now, if such a space is material,
it is itself movable. But a movable space, if its motion is to
be perceptible, presupposes a larger material space for it to
move in, this enlarged space presupposes one larger still,
and so on to infinity.
Thus, all motion that is an object of experience is merely
relative. We have
an object x which we perceive to move;
a space S1 relative to which we perceive x to move;
a larger space S2 relative to which S1 may move.
It might happen that S1 does move relative to S2, and indeed
moves in the opposite direction to x ·and at the same speed·;
in which case we can describe x as ’moving’ in relation to S1
and at the same time ‘motionless’ with respect to S2. These
varying accounts of whether and how x moves continue infinitely as we bring in larger and larger relative spaces. [Kant
now has a long sentence that is hideously unclear, apparently
because it is too compressed. The gist of it seems to be as
follows. An absolute space —i.e. a space that isn’t material 482
because it isn’t movable—is something we assume because it
is required for the possibility of experience. But in doing this
we are assuming something that can’t be perceived •in itself
or •in its consequences. (Perceiving it in its consequences
8  
would be perceiving something that we knew was a case of
some object moving relative to absolute space, and there’s
no way we can perceive that.) Furthermore, although we
need this assumption for the possibility of experience, we
never have any experience in which absolute space plays
a part. The whole story of what we perceive can’t give any
role to absolute space. Kant continues:] So absolute space
is in itself nothing; it’s not any kind of object. All it signifies
is this: Whenever I am thinking about some object that is
moving relative to some space S—·e.g. a leaf blowing through
the window and falling onto the carpet in my study·—my
thought of ‘absolute space’ AS is just my thought of every
other relative space that I can think of as containing S,
the series of such ever-larger spaces running to infinity.
This is just a thought that I have; I’m not confronted by
anything—any matter—that indicates this space AS; so my
thought represents AS as pure, nonempirical, and absolute.
I can compare any empirical space S with AS, representing
S as movable in AS, which is therefore always taken to be
immovable. If you regard AS as an actual thing, you have
mistaken
•the logical universality that consists in our ability to
regard any empirical space as being included in it, for
•a physical universality that consists in its actually
containing every empirical space. . . .
[Kant speaks of this mistake as a case of ‘misunderstanding reason in its
idea’, using ‘idea’ (German Idee) as a technical term that he introduced in
the Critique of Pure Reason and employs just seven times in the present
work. (This version will use ‘idea’ only in translating Idee.) For a grasp
of how it works, you need to start with the understanding and the
concepts that are its tools. We can have a concept of x only if we could
be ‘given’ an example of x in experience; so we have a concept of division
of a bit of matter because we can see or feel a bit of matter being cut into
two or four or. . . What about •the thought of division of a bit of matter
carried the whole way? Unless you think that there are ‘atoms’, smallest
bits of matter that can’t be further divided, •this thought goes with the
thought of an infinitely small bit of matter; that is something we couldn’t
conceivably encounter in experience; so we have no concept of it; but
we do have the idea, this being a thought that takes some concept and
subjects it to the thought of going the whole way or (in terminology that
Kant uses a lot in the Critique but not in the present work) the thought
of a certain kind of totality. It is the role of reason, he holds, to engage in
this totalising sort of thought, which is why he links ideas with reason,
as he links concepts with understanding. In the use of ‘idea’ that we
have just encountered, Kant speaks of the totalising activity as involving
a ‘logical universality’, and he is referring to the totalising that is involved
in the thought of the whole of space.] One last remark: An object’s
movability in space can’t be known a priori, i.e. without
instruction from experience; which is why in the Critique
of Pure Reason I couldn’t count such movability as one of
the pure concepts of the understanding. The concept of
movability, just because it is empirical, can find a place in a
natural science only as a bit of applied metaphysics, which
is where concepts given through experience are dealt with,
though according to a priori principles.
Definition 2
The motion of a thing is the change of its external relations
to a given space.
Remark 1
I have based the concept of •matter on the concept of •motion.
That’s because I wanted to fix the concept of matter without
bringing in the concept of •extension, so that I could consider
matter as a point, helping myself to the common definition of
motion as change of place. But if we are to define the concept
of matter in a comprehensive way that covers moving bodies,
that ‘change-of- place’ definition won’t do. The place of any
9  
body is a point. The distance of the moon from the earth is
given by the shortest line between their places, i.e. betwen
their central points. (That’s the only way to get a determinate
single distance between them; any other approach will have
us measuring from some arbitrarily chosen pair of points—
·say the distance from the lowest point in the Dead Sea
to the highest point in the Mare Frigoris·.) Now, taking a
body’s place to be its central point, a body can move without
changing its place, as the earth does by turning on its axis.
But although the rotating earth doesn’t change its place,
it does change its relation to external space, because at
different times it turns different sides toward the moon, and
these differences produce all kinds of different effects on
the earth. The equation of ‘motion’ with ‘change of place’
holds only for movable points, i.e. physical points. [The
next bit is awkwardly written, but its content can be made
clear. Its point is just that the change-of-place definition
omits more things than just rotation; it omits, for example,
483 the movements that go on when beer is fermenting in a
cask. What the definition applies to is movement of the
cask-and-contents as a unit—movement of the cask, not
movement in the cask.] . . . .
Remark 2
Motions can be divided into two classes. (1) Progressive
movements, which enlarge their space; straight-line movements and curved-line movements that don’t return in on
themselves. (2) Rotatory movements, which don’t enlarge
their space, but keep returning in on themselves, staying
with the same limited space. And these can be divded in
turn, into (2a) circular movements like those of the planets
around the sun and (2b) oscillatory movements like that of a
pendulum. . . . I mention these different kinds of motion in
phoronomy merely because the word ‘speed’ is generally used
in one sense for movements in class (1) and a different sense
for movements in class (2), as you will see in a moment.
Remark 3
In any motion we have just two factors to think about—speed
and direction—once we have set aside all the other properties
of the moving thing. I am here taking for granted the usual
definitions of both of these, but various limitations have to
be built into the definition of direction. . . .
Consider two snails that are exactly alike in shape and
even size, except that one winds to the right and the other
to the left. What does this difference rest on? Or the
difference between the winding of beans around their pole
(like a corkscrew—‘against the sun’, as sailors would say)
and the winding of hops, which go around their pole with 484
the sun? We have here an internal difference between
the two snails, or between the pole-climbing plants—·it’s
‘internal’ in the sense that we can’t make it disapear by
re-arranging other things in certain ways·. Now, the concept
of this internal difference can be constructed, but it can’t be
expressed in general terms. It can happen that two things
differ only in this way, i.e. without this difference bringing
others in its train. Take the rare case of a human being
who is found through an autopsy to have all his organs
inter-related according to the physiological rules that hold for
other human beings except that they are left/right reversed.
This can’t possibly have made any difference to the internal
workings of that person’s body. And yet there is a real
mathematical and indeed internal difference between two
motions that differ only in that way, e.g. two circular motions
differing in direction but exactly alike in all other respects.
[Kant adds his claim that this left/right matter confirms his
view that ‘space in general doesn’t belong to the properties
or relations of things in themselves’ but ‘belongs merely to
10  
the subjective form of our sensible intuition’. He remarks
that he has dealt with this elsewhere [in Prolegomena section
13]. He continues:] But this is a digression from our present
business, in which we have to treat space as a property
of the things we are considering, namely bodies, because
bodies themselves are only phenomena of the external senses
and need to be explained here only as such.—So much for
direction. As for speed: the meaning of this expression also
varies in different contexts. We say that the earth rotates on
its axis ‘faster’ than the sun because it completes a rotation
in a shorter time, although the motion of the earth in this
rotation is slower than that of the sun. [Kant gives other
examples, without suggesting that this point matters much
for his present work. He concludes:] In phoronomy we use
the word ‘speed’ with a merely spatial meaning—the measure
of how far a thing travels in a given period of time.
Definition 3
485 Rest is time-taking presence in the same place; for something to be time-taking is for it to exist throughout a time.
[The translation makes this look trivial, but it doesn’t in the German.]
Remark
A moving body is momentarily at each point of the line that it
traverses. Is it at rest at each point or is it moving? No doubt
you’ll want to say that it is moving, because it is precisely
by moving that it came to be at this point. But let’s consider
what is going on in a movement ·I’ll call Oscillate·, in which
a body tracks the line AB, from A to B and then back
to A again, doing this with a uniform speed so that
the total time is exactly one second—half a second
from A to B and half a second for the return journey.
This can’t happen unless the body doesn’t spend any time—
not the smallest portion—at B. Why? Because it is present
at B only once in Oscillate; allow its presence there to occupy
a tiny period of time and you’ll have the problem of which of
the two journeys—AB or BA—to assign it to. Either way, the
times for the two sub-journeys won’t be equal. Now change
the example to a movement (·I’ll call it Straight·) in which
a body moves exactly as in Oscillate except that instead of switching back at B it continues straight on
to a further point C.
In Straight the body is moving at B, not at rest. (Why?
Because B is just one point in a continuously moving journey,
with nothing special about it except that we have chosen to
talk about it. If the body weren’t moving at B it wouldn’t be
moving at any point along the A–C line, which means Straight
didn’t occur.) But Straight is supposed to be exactly like
Oscillate except for the directional difference; so if the body
is moving at B in Straight then it is moving at B in Oscillate
too—but we have just shown that it can’t be! Now consider
a third example, of a movement ·that I’ll call Updown·, in
which
a body rises from A up to B which is directly above A,
and then—having lost its motion by means of gravity
when it reaches B—it falls back again from B to A.
In this case is the body moving at B or at rest there? The
most plausible answer is this:
In Updown the body is at rest at point B; because
when it is there it has been deprived by gravity of all its
upward motion, and the downward motion that gravity
will also give to it hasn’t yet begun. And something
that doesn’t have any motion is at rest.
But if that is all right for Updown, why isn’t it also all right
for Oscillate; for in the latter also the return journey from 486
B to A can’t start until the forward journey from A to B has
ended; so that in Oscillate also we seem to have to conclude
that the body is not, after all, moving at B. But we can’t draw
11  
that conclusion, because something that is moving with a
uniform speed can’t be at rest anywhere along its journey.
What, then, makes the crucial difference between Oscillate
and Updown? It is that in Updown the body’s motion isn’t
uniform—it is uniformly decelerated and then uniformly
accelerated, in such a way that its speed at B is reduced
not to nothing but only to a speed S that is smaller than any
assignable speed. Keep gravity out of this for a moment, and
suppose that the body with speed S in Updown doesn’t start
to fall at B but keeps moving upwards. ·How far would it
get, in how much time, if it stayed at speed S? The answer is
this·:
Take any distance you like, however small, along the
line up from B, the body wouldn’t cover that distance,
however long it kept moving with speed S.
This implies that (for any possible experience) the body would
remain at B for all eternity. Consequently, it is put into a
state of •time-taking presence in the same place, i.e. a state of
•rest, although owing to the continuous influence of gravity,
i.e. the change of this state, the rest is immediately abolished.
To •be in a time-taking state is conceptually different from
•spending time in that state. . . . Thus rest can’t be defined
as lack of motion, because that is negative and so can’t
be constructed. It must instead be defined as time-taking
presence in the same place. This can be constructed, by
representing a motion with infinitely small speed through a
period of time that is not infinitely short; and because it can
be constructed it can be used in applying mathematics to
natural science.
Definition 4
To construct the concept of a composite motion means to
present a priori in intuition a motion as the result of two or
more given motions united in one movable thing.
Remark
In constructing a concept one mustn’t make use of any
input from experience, e.g. presupposing some force that
one knows about only from experience. Putting the point in 487
its most general form: in constructing a concept one musn’t
use any concept that can’t be given a priori in intuition—such
as the concepts of cause and effect, and of action and
resistance, etc. Don’t lose sight of the fact that phoronomy’s
only concern is with the construction of motions in general
as amounts, so that it takes matter merely as something movable, ignoring any facts about how much matter is moving
in any given case. So phoronomy has from the outset to
characterize these motions solely as amounts determined
by their speed, their direction and their composition. That
much has to be settled entirely a priori and indeed through
intuition, setting things up for applied mathematics. For the
rules governing how motions are inter-connected through
physical causes—i.e. forces—can’t be properly explained
until there’s a mathematically constructed basis containing
the principles of their composition in general.
Principle
Every motion that could be an object of experience can be
viewed either as •the motion of a body in a space that is at
rest or as •the rest of a body in a space that is moving in the
opposite direction with equal speed. It’s a free choice.
Remark
We can experience the motion of a body only if both •the
body and •the space in which it moves are objects of external
experience—hence, only if they are both material. [Remember
that Kant has said that he calls a space ‘material’ if it can move relative
to a larger space.] So an absolute motion—i.e. a motion related
12  
to an immaterial space—can’t possibly be experienced and
is hence nothing at all for us (even if we allow that absolute
space is something in itself ). But in all relative motion the
space itself, because it is assumed to be material, can be
represented as at rest or as moving. I represent the space
as at rest when it isn’t included in some larger space in
relation to which I could see it as moving. And I represent
the space as moving when it is included in some such larger
space; an example would be seeing a ball roll along a table in
the cabin of a ship, where there is a larger space (including
the shore) beyond the space of the cabin, in relation to
which •the cabin’s space is moving and—it may happen—
488 •the ball is at rest. ·But then the shore’s space may be
enclosed in a •still larger space relative to which the •shore’s
space is moving and the •cabin’s space is at rest and the
•ball is moving after all·! With respect to any empirically
given space, we can’t rule out its being enclosed in a still
larger space in relation to which it may be moving or not
moving. Thus, for all experience and for every inference from
experience, it can’t make any difference whether I choose
to •consider a body as moving or rather to •consider the
body as at rest and the space it is in as moving in the
opposite direction with the same speed. The two ways of
looking at it are strictly equivalent. You might think that
in relation to absolute space one of the accounts is right
and the other wrong, but absolute space can’t possibly enter
into any experience of ours, so we can set it aside. The only
difference between body-moving-in-motionless-space and
space-moving-around-motionless-body is in how we connect
them with other phenomena in our theories.
Also, our experience can’t enable us to pick out a fixed
point by reference to which we could give sense to a distinction between •absolute motion and •absolute rest. Why not?
Because everything we confront in experience is •material,
and therefore •movable, and therefore •perhaps actually
moving without our being able to perceive this motion. . . .
When a body moves in empirical space, I can think of any
proportion of the given speed—from none to all—as belonging to the body, and the remainder—from all to none—as
belonging to the space moving in the opposite direction.
There can’t be any empirical evidence that would favour any
particular distribution. In saying this I am assuming that
we are dealing only with motion in a straight line. When
other motions are concerned, there isn’t the same freedom
of choice about what to attribute to the body and what to the
space. For example, as between
•the earth rotates daily on its axis, while the surrounding space (the starry heavens) stay at rest
and
•the earth remains still while the starry heavens revolve around it,
there are empirically detectable differences. I shall discuss
this later on [starting on page 61]. In phoronomy, then, where
I consider the motion of a body only in relation to space
(upon whose motion or rest the body has no influence at
all), it is an arbitrary matter how much (if any) of the speed
of a given motion I attribute to the body in question and
how much (if any) I attribute to the space that contains it.
Later on, ·in mechanics·, where we’ll consider how a moving
body interacts causally with other bodies in the space of
its motion, it will make a discoverable difference how we
distribute the speed between the moving body and the space
containing it. I’ll show this in the proper place [starting at
page 53].
Definition 5
The composition of motion is the representation of the 489
13  
motion of a point as identical with two or more motions of
the point combined.
Remark
Since in phoronomy I don’t have thoughts of any quality
of matter other than its movability, I can consider matter
itself only as a mere point, and can consider any motion as
a track through a space. But that doesn’t mean that I am
attending only to the space that geometry deals with; because
I also bring in the •time involved and hence the •speed of the
point’s movement through space. So phoronomy is the pure
doctrine of the amounts of motions.
what comes next, conservatively translated: The determinate
concept of a an amount is the concept of the production of
the representation of an object through the composition of
the geneous.
what Kant seems to have meant: Any how-much thought is
the thought of a process of mentally assembling something
out of parts that are all of the same kind as it. In thinking
about (say) a gallon of water one is somehow thinking of
mentally building up a gallon drop by drop.
Now, nothing is homogeneous with motion except motion, so
phoronomy is a doctrine of
the putting together of different motions of a single
point according to their direction and speed,
which is the same as
the representation of a single motion as comprising
within itself two or more motions occurring at the
same time.
Note that this concerns two or motions that constitute one
motion; ·all there is to the one motion is those two or more
put together·; we are not concerned here with two or more
motions that cause some single motion to occur. In order
to find the motion arising from the composition of several
motions—as many as you want—you have to proceed piecemeal (as we do with the production of all quantities): start by
working out the motion that comes from compounding two of
the motions, then compound this with a third. . . and so on.
So the doctrine of the composition of all motions comes down
to the composition of two. [Kant goes on to say that there are
three different ways in which two motions—whether of equal
or unequal speeds—can be happening in a single point at
the same time: They may be going (1) in a straight line in the
same direction, (2) in a straight line in opposite directions, or 490
(3) along different lines that are at an angle to one another.]
Proposition
The only way to think of two motions as composing the
motion of a single point is by representing •one of the two as
occurring in absolute space, and •the other as consisting in
the movement of a relative space in the opposite direction.
Proof
First case: A single point undergoes two motions in the
same direction along the same line at one time.
[Kant’s presentation of this part of his proof is very hard to
follow. It starts with this line of thought: In phoronomy we
can equate a speed with a distance/time pair, as we do when
we name a speed in terms of ‘miles per hour’. Now, suppose
that a point is subject to two movements at once, both in a
straight line and in the same direction, and think about how
14  
we can represent their speeds. If they are equal, then their
speeds can be represented by the AB and ab lines in Figure
1. But. . . The preparer of this version of the text is defeated
by what comes next. We are threatened with some kind of
incoherence or contradiction in representing the speeds of
491 the two movements on the assumption that they are both
movements of a single point x relative to a single space.
[The difficulty is solved, Kant tells us, if we take one of
the movements to be a left-to-right movement by x from A to
B and take the other to be a right-to-left movement of some
relative space that also contains x.
[That is straightforward enough, but the difficulty it is
supposed to remedy defeats understanding. The passage
in question is presented, closely following the two currently
available translations of this work (which differ very little in
their handling of this passage) on page 66.]
Second case: Two motions in exactly opposite directions are
to be combined at one and the same point.
Let AB be one of these motions and AC the other in the
opposite direction (and again let’s take the speeds to be
equal). In this case the very thought of representing two
such motions of a single point x in relation to single space at
the same time is plainly impossible. If we are to make sense
of the notion of two equal and opposite motions of a single
point at the same time, we’ll have to think of it as involving a
point x that moves in a certain direction relative to absolute
space while the relative space that also contains x is moving
in the same direction at the same speed. The upshot of this,
of course, that relative to the relative space x doesn’t move
at all. [When in contexts like this Kant speaks of ‘the relative space’
that is involved, we can take him to mean something like ‘the smallest
intuitively convenient space’ that is involved, out of the possibly infinite
series of ever-larger relative spaces that x is contained in.]
Third case: Two motions of a single point go in different 492
directions—not opposite directions but different ones that
enclose an angle.
·To start with, ignore the dotted lines and attend to the
square.· Let the two motions we are concerned with be AB
and AC. (The angle BAC could be any non-acute angle; it
doesn’t have to be a right angle as it is here.) Now, if these
two motions occur at the same time in the same space, they
will go in the directions AB and AC but they won’t follow the
lines AB and AC, but only lines parallel to these. The moving
point will go through m; and this will be as though the AB
movement had pulled the AC movement over to the line Mm,
and the AC movement had pulled the AB movement down to
the line Em. [Of course all of that should be said first about •a point
between A and m, and before that about a point between A and •that
point, and. . . and so on. To draw this properly we would need infinitely
15  
many smaller squares within the big one! But jumping across and down
to m is sufficient for Kant to make his case.] If the directions are to
remain the same, therefore, one of the two motions must
be altering the other. [Actually, each motion must alter the other.]
But the Proposition we are proving is about what the two
motions compose; and the meaning of that (see Definition
5 on page 14) is that the two will jointly be the motion in
question, not that by changing one another they’ll produce
it.
On the hand, that our moving point x undergoes motion
AC in absolute space while—instead of x’s undergoing motion
AB—some relative space that x is in undergoes motion BA.
Then while x moves AE in absolute space, the relative space
moves Ee, that is, moves to the left, so that x’s position in
the relative space is m. And the same story holds for x’s
493 absolute move AF while the relative space moves Ff; and for
x’s entire absolute move AC while the relative space moves
Cc. From the standpoint of the relative space, therefore, x
moves smoothly down the diagonal, through m and n ·and of
course all the intermediate positions· to D, which is exactly
the same result as if it had undergone movements AB and
AC. So we get the result we want without having to postulate
two motions that affect one another.
Remark 1
•Geometrical construction requires that two amounts when
put together are a third amount, not that they produce the
third in a causal way—for that would be •mechanical construction. For two items to be completely similar and equal
in every way that can be known about in intuition is for them
to be congruous. All geometrical construction of complete
identity rests on congruity. This congruity of two combined
motions with a third (as what is composed by the two) can
never take place when the two are represented in a single
space, e.g. in a single relative space. Hence each attempt to
•disprove the Proposition on page 14 has failed because it is
come up with merely mechanical solutions—saying how two
motions m1 and m2 combine with one another to produce
m3 a third motion. Such attempts didn’t prove that m1 and
m2 were identical with m3 and that because of this identity
they could be presented in pure intuition a priori. [Kant wrote
‘Each attempt to •prove the Proposition’, but that must have been a slip.]
Remark 2
When a speed AC is termed ‘double’, this can only mean
that it consists of two simple and equal speeds AB and
BC (see the diagram on page 14). But if a ‘double speed’
is explained as ‘a motion whereby a doubly great space
is traversed in the same time’, then something is being
assumed that shouldn’t be taken for granted, namely that
two equal speeds can be combined in the same way as two
equal spaces. It isn’t obvious that a given speed consists of
smaller speeds—that a speed is made up of slownesses!—in
the way that a space consists of smaller spaces. The parts
of the speed aren’t external to one another, as the parts
of the space are; and if a speed is to be considered as an
amount, then the concept of its amount (·‘How fast?’·) can’t
be constructed in the same way as the concept of the size of
a space (·’How big?’·), because the former is intensive and
the latter extensive. [Except for a passing mention (not included
in this version), this is the first time Kant has used ‘intensive’ in this
work. Examples: ‘How severe was the pain?’ and ‘How hot is the water?’
‘How fast did the train go?’ ask about intensive magnitude, ‘How long
did the pain last?’ and ‘How much water is there?’ and ‘How far did the
train go?’ ask about extensive magnitude.] But the only way this 494
construction can be done is by putting together two equal
motions, the motion of the body in one direction and the
16  
equal motion of the relative space in the opposite direction.
Two equal speeds can’t be combined in one body except
through external moving causes—e.g. a ship carries the body
with one of these speeds while another moving force within
the ship gives the body a second speed equal to the first. . . .
So much for the addition of speeds to one another. But when
it’s a matter of subtracting one speed from another, it is
easy enough to •think of such subtraction once we have the
notion of a speed as an amount by addition; but it’s not so
easy to •construct the concept of this subtraction. To do this
one must combine two opposite motions in one body—and
how is that to happen? It can’t happen if we work with only
one space that doesn’t move. ‘Isn’t the concept of opposite
and equal motions of a single body in a single space simply
the concept of rest?’ No, it is not! What we get out of this
is not the concept of rest but merely the fact that what we
are trying to do is impossible. As I have already shown, the
composition that is assumed in the proposition ·on page 14·
to be possible has to be done by combining the motion of the
body with the motion of the ·relative· space ·that contains
it·. Finally, the composition of two motions whose directions
enclose an angle: this also can’t be thought of in the body
by reference to a single space. We can make sense of there
being a body which is acted on by a northward-pushing force
and a westward-pushing one, which between them produce
a movement of the body in the north-westerly direction. But
that is the •mechanical account of the concept of this kind
of composition, not the •mathematical construction of it. A
mathematical construction has only to make intuitive what
the combined movement is, not how it can be produced by
Nature or art through certain tools and forces. . . .495
Remark 3
So there we have phoronomy—a pure doctrine not of •motion
but of the •quantity of motion, in which matter is thought
of wholly in terms of its mere movability. All it contains
is this single proposition—·the one on page 14·—about the
composition of motion, applied to the three kinds of cases I
have discussed. And it only concerns straight-line motions,
not motions along curves; because curved-line motion is
continuously changing in direction, and there has to be a
cause for this change, a cause that can’t be merely space.
People usually take the phrase ‘composite motion’ to refer
only to the case where the directions of the motion enclose
an angle; this. . . . hasn’t done any harm to physics, because
in physics all three kinds of combination can be adequately
treated as versions of the third case, ·the enclosed-angle·
one. If the angle enclosing the two given motions is thought
of as infinitely small [i.e. as approaching 0 degrees], it contains
the first case; and if the angle is represented as only infinitely
little different from a single straight line [i.e. as approaching 180
degrees], it contains the second case. So all three of the cases
I have listed can indeed be covered by the single familiar
enclosing-an-angle formula. But a proper a priori grasp of
the quantitative doctrine of motion isn’t provided by that
formula, and such a grasp is useful for many purposes. [Perhaps that last remark goes with Kant’s saying that confining ‘composite
motion’ to the enclosed-angle kind of case is harmful to ‘the principle of
the classification of a pure philosophical science in general’.]
[Kant ends this chapter with a needlessly difficult paragraph
connecting the •three kinds of composition of motion with the
•three categories—i.e. pure concepts of the understanding—
that he lists under heading ‘Quantity’ in the Critique of Pure
Reason. In that work the division is into •unity, •plurality,
•totality (corresponding to propositions of the form •‘Henry is
a tyrant’, •‘Some husbands are tyrants’, •‘All weak husbands
are tyrants’). Kant hopes to link that with phoronomy by
speaking of the latter in terms of •unity of line and direction,
17  
the •plurality of directions in one and the same line, and
finally the •totality of directions as well as of lines.]
[In that paragraph, the Critique’s Quantity trio are labelled first by Größe
and then by Quantität. But in the Critique the only label is Quantität,
whereas Größe is regularly used there for ‘size’ or ‘magnitude’. Quite
apart from questions of consistency, Größe just does mean ‘size’ or ‘amount’
or something like it, and has nothing to do with that one/some/all trio of
categories; the only two places where Kant writes as though it were the
right label for that trio is the paragraph reported above and in the list
of category-trios on page 6. —Setting aside issues about the terminology
of the Critique (which won’t concern us much), the present version will
mainly translate
Größe by ‘size’ or ‘magnitude’ or ‘amount’ or by phrases using
‘how much’ or ‘how strong’ etc., and Quantität by ‘quantity’.
The standard meanings of the German words are confirmed by Kant’s
uses of them: Größe stands for a universal—bigness, how-much-ness,
something that a thing has; whereas Quantität stands for a particular
portion—e.g. the portion of coffee that I drank a moment ago—this being
something that a thing is. Both Quantität and ‘quantity’ can also be used
to name a universal, but they have this other option, which is the one
Kant sometimes employs. Quite often he uses Quantität to stand for a
universal—i.e. as equivalent to Größe—and in those cases the relevant
English word will have a subscript q, as in ‘the amountq of matter in it’
on page 47. Don’t think or worry about this; it is put there just for the
record. Just twice he uses Größe to mean ‘quantity’ in the non-universal
sense.]
18  
Chapter 2
Metaphysical Foundations of Dynamics
Definition 1
496 Matter is whatever is movable and fills a space. To fill a
space means to resist every ·other· movable thing that tries
to move into that space. A space that is not filled is an empty
space.
Remark
This is, now, the dynamical definition of the concept of matter.
This definition presupposes the phoronomic one [page 7] but
adds to it a causal property, namely the capacity to resist a
motion within a certain space. This property couldn’t have
any role in phoronomy, even when we were dealing with the
motions of a single point in opposite directions. This filling
of space keeps a certain space free from the intrusion of any
other movable thing, whatever direction it is coming from.
Now we must investigate what matter’s all-around resistance
is based on and what it is. Definition 1 makes it clear that
we aren’t talking about matter’s resistance to •being pushed
from one place to another (that’s a mechanical phenomenon,
497 ·to be dealt with in chapter 3·), but only its resistance to
•being squeezed into a smaller amount of space. The phrase
‘occupying a space’, i.e. being immediately present at every
point in the space, is used merely to indicate the extension
of a thing in space; and this concept of a thing’s spatial
extension or presence-in-space implies nothing about what
if anything the thing does to resist other things that try to
force their way into that space. It doesn’t even rule out
the possibility that something present in a given space acts
causally to attract other movable things into that space. The
concept might also apply to something that, rather than
being an instance of matter in a space, is itself a space;
because every space is an assemblage of smaller spaces,
·and one of them could be said to be in the larger space·. . . .
Because it leaves all these possibilities open, the concept of
occupying a space is broader and less determinate than the
concept of filling a space.
Proposition 1
Matter fills a space not by its mere existence but by a special
moving force.
Proof
Penetration into a space is motion. The cause of motion’s becoming less, or even changing into immobility, is resistance
to it. Now, the only thing that can be combined with a motion
in such a way as to lessen or destroy it is another motion, in
the opposite direction, of the same movable thing. [Kant adds
‘(phoronomic proposition)’; but what he has just said doesn’t come from
the Proposition on page 14. Perhaps it comes from the various proofs
and comments relating to that Proposition.] Consequently, when a
portion of matter x fills a space and thus resists all intrusion
into that space by another portion of matter y, the resistance
that it puts up against y’s coming into the space is a cause
of y’s moving in the opposite direction. But our label for
any cause of motion is ‘moving force’. Consequently, matter
fills its space not by merely being there but by ·exerting·
moving force. [At the start of this paragraph, Kant says that the very
first instant of a thing’s movement is called Bestrebung, which can mean
‘attempt’ or ‘endeavour’ or the like. Like other early modern philosophers
he used that term (or its equivalent in other languages) to stand for an
active tendency that a body may have to move in a certain way. To say
that thing has a Bestrebung to enter a given space is not to say •that it
is consciously trying to move in, but it is to say more than merely •that
it is in a state such that it will move in unless something stops it. From
now on in this version, ‘endeavour’ will be used for Bestrebung (and not
for anything else), but remember that it isn’t a psychological term.]
19  
Remark
Lambert and others used the rather ambiguous word ‘solidity’
to name the property of a portion of matter by which it fills a
space; and they maintained that solidity must be possessed
by every thing that exists (every substance), or at least by
every thing in the external sensible world. According to their
498 way of thinking, a real thing x in a region of space must by
its very concept carry with it this resistance: the principle of
contradiction rules out there being anything else in the space
containing x. But a portion of matter that is moving towards
penetrating a space that already contains another portion of
matter isn’t pushed back by the principle of contradiction!
The only way I can make sense of the suggestion that
a contradiction is involved in a space’s containing one
thing x and being penetrated by another y
is by attributing to x a force through which it pushes back
an external movable thing that approaches it. Here the
mathematician (·Lambert·) has assumed, as an initial datum
in constructing the concept of matter, something that doesn’t
admit of being further constructed. Well, he can indeed
begin his construction with any datum he pleases, treating
the datum as unanalysed; but he isn’t entitled to block
the route back to the first principles of natural science by
analysing this datum as something wholly incapable of any
mathematical construction.
Definition 2
Attractive force is the moving force through which a portion
of matter can be the cause of another portion’s moving
towards it (or, equivalently, through which it resists another
portion’s moving away from it).
Repelling force is the moving force through which a portion
of matter can be the cause of another portion’s moving away
from it (or, equivalently, through which it resists another
portion’s moving towards it).
[In English we have the verb ‘move’ both as transitive (as in ‘She moved
the jar to the end of the shelf’) and intransitive as in ‘You spoiled the
picture: just as I clicked, you moved’. In the phrase translated as ‘moving
force’ Kant is referring not to a force that moves-intransitive but rather
to a force that moves-transitive; not a force that roams, but one that
shoves. In fact, German doesn’t have a verb that exactly matches the
English intransitive ‘move’. In the present version of this work, Kant is
often translated as saying of some item that it ‘moves’; but he does this
with a German expression which would be mechnically translated as ‘is
moved’.]
Note
These are the only two moving forces that can be thought of,
·as I shall now prove·. In the context of questions about one
portion of matter impressing some motion on another, the
two portions must be regarded as points; so any transaction
of that kind must be regarded as happening between two
points on a single straight line. Now, there are only two ways
for two points to move ·relative to one another· on a single
straight line: either
•they approach one another, caused to do so by an
attractive force; or
•they recede from one another, caused to do so by a
repelling force. 499
Consequently, these two kinds of forces are the only ones we
can make sense of; and all the forces of motion in material
Nature must come down to them.
Proposition 2
(a) Matter fills its space by the repelling forces of all its parts,
i.e. by its own force of extension, and (b) this ·repelling force·
has a definite degree that can be thought of as smaller or
20  
greater to infinity. [This use of ‘degree’ translates what is almost the
first occurrence of Grad in the original. From here on, Grad/degree will
occur often; in Kant’s usage it is firmly linked to the notion of intensive
magnitude [see note on page 16]. We’ll later see him writing about the
degree to which a given portion of space is filled; this doesn’t mean
(extensive) how much of the space is filled but (intensive) how strongly
the space is filled.]
Proof
(a) Matter fills a space only through moving force (Proposition
1), specifically by a moving force that resists the penetration,
i.e. the approach, of other matter; and this is a repelling force
(Definition 2). So matter fills its space only through repelling
forces, and indeed through the repelling forces of all its parts.
(Why ‘all its parts’? Well, try to suppose that some part x of
a portion of matter doesn’t exert repelling force. That means
that the portion of space assigned to x is not filled, which
means that that x isn’t a portion of matter after all, but only a
region of space contained within a portion of matter.) And the
force of something that is extended by virtue of the repulsion
of all its parts is a force of extension. [Kant adds in brackets that
this is ‘expansive’ force—the first time this word has occurred in the work.
We’ll see a lot of it from now on.] Therefore, matter fills its space
only by its own force of extension. (b) Given any particular
force, it is conceivable that there should be a greater one.
If for a given force F it was inconceivable that there should
be a greater force, that would mean that F was the greatest
conceivable force, which could make something travel an
infinite distance in a finite length of time; which is impossible.
·Why ‘an infinite distance’? Well, suppose that the best F
can do is to make something travel N miles in a year, where
N is a finite number; then it is conceivable that some force
F+ should make a thing travel N+1 miles in a year, so that F+
would be greater than F. Where there’s room for the thought
‘greater distance’ there’s room for the thought ‘greater force’·.
Also, given any particular force, it is conceivable that there
should be a lesser one. If that weren’t so, there could be a
force F such that a weaker force was inconceivable, which
implies that the distance F could make a thing travel in a
year was zero; meaning that it couldn’t make anything move
at all; meaning that F isn’t a force of movement after all.
(·The explanation of zero in this half of the proof of (b) can
easily be worked out from the explanation of infinity in the
first half·.) Putting (a) and (b) together: The force of extension
through which every portion of matter fills its space has
a degree that is never the greatest or smallest, but beyond
which greater as well as smaller degrees can always be found.
[Kant presumably means ‘can be found in the realm of possibilities’ = ‘can
be conceived’, not ‘can be found in the material world’. His later uses of
‘can be found’ will be translated without comment.]
Note 1
The expansive force of matter is also called elasticity. This 500
force is the basis for the filling of space as an essential
property of all matter, so it is basic, not a consequence
of any other property of matter. So all matter is basically
elastic.
Note 2
Given any extensive force there can be found a greater
moving force that can work against it and diminish the space
that the extensive force is trying to expand. In this case the
latter force is called a ‘compressive’ one. Thus, for any given
portion of matter a compressive force can be found that can
squeeze this matter into a smaller space than the one it is
currently occupying.
21  
Definition 3
A portion of matter x in its motion penetrates another
portion y when by compression it completely abolishes the
space of y’s extension. [Kant’s verb aufhebt apparently has to mean
‘abolishes’ in this context. But we’ll see in a moment that what he means
is that x takes over the space through which y was extended, depriving y
of it.]
Remark
When an air-pump’s piston is pushed ever closer to the
bottom of the cylinder, the air-matter is compressed. If this
compression could be carried so far that the piston came flat
against the bottom with no air escaping, then the air-matter
would be penetrated ·in the sense laid down in Definition
3·. For it is between two portions of matter that leave no
space for it, so that it’s to be met with between the bottom of
the cylinder and the piston without occupying a space. This
penetrability of matter by external compressive forces would
be called ‘mechanical’, if there were such a thing—or indeed if
such a thing were conceivable. I distinguish this impossible
penetrability of matter from another kind of penetrability
which is perhaps equally impossible. I may need to say a
little about this second kind of penetrability later on. [We’ll see
that in this second kind of penetrability, which Kant will call ‘chemical’,
x penetrates y by coming to share all y’s space with y (see page 44).
This is a much more natural meaning for ‘penetrate’ than the present
‘mechanical’ one.]
Proposition 3
501 (a) Matter can be •compressed to infinity, but (b) it can never
be •penetrated by other matter, however great the latter’s
pressing force may be.
Proof A basic force through which a portion of matter tries
to extend itself all through the space that it occupies must
be greater when enclosed in a smaller space, and must be
infinite when compressed into an infinitely small space. (a)
Now, for any given extensive force that a portion of matter
has, there can be found a greater compressive force that
squeezes this matter into a smaller space, and so on to
infinity. But (b) penetrating the matter would require its
compression into an infinitely small space, and thus would
require an infinitely strong compressive force; but such a
force is impossible. Consequently, a portion of matter cannot
be penetrated by the compression of any other portion of
matter.
Remark
I have assumed at the start of this proof that the more an
extensive force is constricted the more strongly it must resist.
This might not hold for a •derivative elastic force, but it can
be postulated of ·any •basic elastic force, i.e.· any elastic
force that a portion of matter has essentially, just because
it is matter filling a space. Expansive force exercised from
all points toward all sides constitutes the very concept of
elasticity. And the smaller the space in which a given amount
of expanding force has to exercise itself, the more strongly
the force must exercise itself at every point in the space.
Definition 4
The impenetrability of matter that comes from its resistance ·to being squeezed·—impenetrability that increases
proportionally to the degree of compression—I call ‘relative’.
The impenetrability that comes from the assumption that 502
matter as such can’t be compressed at all is called ‘absolute’
impenetrability. The filling of space with absolute impenetrability can be called ‘mathematical’; that with merely relative
impenetrability can be called ‘dynamical’.
22  
Remark 1
According to the merely mathematical concept of impenetrability (which doesn’t assume that any moving force is
basically inherent in matter), no matter can be compressed
except to the extent that it contains empty spaces within
itself. So matter, just as matter, resists all penetration
unconditionally and with absolute necessity. According to
my discussion of it, however, impenetrability has a physical basis; for the extensive force makes matter itself, as
something extended filling its space, first of all possible. But
this force has a degree that can be overcome, so the space
occupied by a portion of matter can be diminished, i.e. its
space can be somewhat penetrated by a given compressive
force; but complete penetration is impossible, because it
would require an infinite compressive force. Because of all
this, the filling of space must be regarded only as relative
impenetrability.
Remark 2
In fact absolute impenetrability is nothing more or less
than a qualitas occulta. [Kant here refers (in Latin) to the ‘occult (=
hidden) qualities’ that were postulated by various mediaeval philosophers
to ‘explain’ certain phenomena; by Kant’s time, everyone agreed that
these explanations were no good. There were two basic complaints about
them: (i) They weren’t derived from anything deeper or more general;
they were always treated as basic, fundamental. (ii) Their ‘explanations’
were always slam-bang one-sentence affairs, with no complexity that
might enable them to connect fruitfully with other explanations of other
phenomena.] We ask ‘Why can’t portions of matter penetrate
one another in their motion?’ and are given the answer
‘Because they are impenetrable’! The appeal to repelling force
is not open to this complaint. It is true that (i) this force also
can’t be shown to be possible through our giving a further
analysis of it, so that we have to accept it as a fundamental
force; but it doesn’t (ii) lack helpful complexity, because it
involves the concept of an •active cause and of •the laws
of this cause in accordance with which the strength of the
force can be measured by how strongly the space in question
resists penetration.
Definition 5
Material substance is whatever it is in space that is movable
on its own, i.e. separated from everything else existing outside it in space. The motion of a portion of matter whereby 503
it ceases to be a part ·of some larger portion of matter· is
separation. The separation of the parts of a portion of matter
is physical division.
Remark
The concept of substance signifies the ultimate subject of
existence, i.e. everything that doesn’t exist merely as a predicate [here = ‘property’] of some other existing thing, ·in the way
a blush exists merely as a property of a face, or a storm exists
merely as a property of some wind and water·. Now, matter is
the subject of everything existent in space; for besides matter
no other spatial subject can be thought of except space itself;
and the concept of space hasn’t any content relating to
existence, and merely contains the necessary conditions for
things we can perceive through the external senses to have
external relations to one another. So •matter—as what is
movable in space—is •substance in space. Similarly every
part of a portion of matter will also be a substance, because
it too is itself a subject and not merely a predicate of other
portions of matter; so every part of any portion of matter is
itself a portion of matter. . . .
23  
Proposition 4
Matter is divisible to infinity, and indeed into parts each of
which is again matter.
Proof
Matter is impenetrable because of its basic force of extension
(Proposition 3 [page 22]), but this force of extension is only
the consequence of the repelling forces of each point in a
space filled with matter. Now, the space that matter fills
is mathematically divisible to infinity, i.e. its parts can be
differentiated to infinity; although they can’t be moved and
so can’t be pulled apart. . . . Now, in a space filled with matter
every part of the space contains repelling force to hold at
bay on all sides all the parts surrounding it, and hence to
repel them and be repelled by them, i.e. to be moved to
504 a distance away from them. Hence every part of a space
filled by matter is movable and is therefore separable by
physical division from any of the other parts that are material
substances. Consequently, every mathematical division of a
region of space has corresponding to it a possible physical
division—a pulling apart—of the substance that fills the
region of space; and such mathematical divisions can be
continued to infinity, so all matter is physically divisible to
infinity—divisible indeed into parts each of which is itself
also a material substance.
Remark 1
Proving the infinite divisibility of space is far from proving
the infinite divisibility of matter unless one first shows that in
every part of space there is material substance, i.e. separately
movable parts. ·To see the need for this further premise,
consider this position, which· a monadist might adopt:
‘Matter consists of physical points, each of which—
just because it is a point—has no separately movable
parts, but nevertheless fills a region of space by mere
repelling force. The region containing such a physical
point is divided, but the substance acting in it—the
physical point—is not divided.’
Thus, this monadist can have matter made up of physically
indivisible parts while still allowing it to occupy space in
a dynamical way, ·i.e. to occupy space by exerting force
throughout it·.
But the proof I have given completely undermines this
monadist dodge. My proof makes it clear that every point
in a filled space must push back against whatever pushes
in upon it. This •can be the case if the point contains a
reacting subject that is separately movable and distinct from
every other repelling point; and it’s clear that it •can’t be
the case if all you have is a mere driving force exerting itself
through a region of space. To get an intuitive grasp of this
(and, therefore, of the proof I have given for Proposition 4),
consider this diagram:
A is stipulated to be a monad whose sphere of repulsive
force has the line aAb as a diameter. Then penetration of
A’s sphere of influence is resisted at the point a. But now
consider a point c that is within the sphere, between a and
A (there must be such a point, because space is infinitely
divisible); and ask yourself what the state of affairs is at c.
The answer is that there must be at c something that holds A
apart from a:
A force emitted from A can’t make itself felt at a unless
·the contents of· those two points are kept apart;
without that, they would penetrate one another ·so
that the entire sphere would condense into a point·. 505
24  
So something at c resists penetration by a and by A; so it
repells the monad A at the same time as being repelled by it.
And repelling is a kind of motion. So we get the result that
c is something movable, ich means that it is matter. This
shows that the filling of that sphere can’t consist merely in a
repelling force’s being exerted throughout it by a one-point
monad in its centre. On the contrary, the sphere must be
filled with matter. (We are assuming, of course, that the
argument about the point c could be repeated for any point
within the sphere.)
Mathematicians represent the repelling forces of the parts
of elastic portions of matter. . . .as increasing or decreasing in
proportion to their distances from one another. The smallest
parts of air, for instance, repel each other in inverse proportion to the distance between them, because their elasticity is
inversely proportional to the spaces that they are squeezed
into. Don’t misunderstand the thought and mistake the
language of the mathematicians by taking •something that
necessarily belongs to the process of constructing the concept
to be •something that applies to the object of the concept.
·Here’s why they are different·. In the construction process,
two things’ being in contact can be represented as their
being an infinitely small distance apart; and indeed the
construction has to handle contact in that way in cases
where a single quantity [Quantität] of matter, i.e. a single
quantum of repelling forces, is represented as completely
filling spaces of different sizes ·at different times·. For us
to •have an intuitive sense of the expansion of a portion of
matter to fill a larger space—·•that being what constructions
are for·—we have to make use of the idea of an infinitely
small distance. [See the note on ‘idea’ on page 9.] But if matter is
infinitely divisible, there can’t be any actual distance between
any two ·nearest· parts; however much a portion of matter
expands, it is still a continuum.
Remark 2
When mathematicians are just doing mathematics, they can
ignore the tricks played by mistaken metaphysics. They
can be sure of the obvious mathematical truth that space is
infinitely divisible, without caring about objections that may
be brought against this by foolish nit-pickers. But when they
are ·not merely doing mathematics but· taking mathematical
propositions that are valid for space and applying them to
substance filling space, they have to submit what they are
saying to purely conceptual tests, which means that they
have to attend to metaphysics. Proposition 4 [page 24] is
already a proof of this. For although matter is infinitely
divisible mathematically, it doesn’t follow that matter is
physically divisible to infinity. Granted that every part of
space is also a space, so that every part of space includes
within itself parts that are external to one another, it doesn’t
follow that in every possible part of this filled space there
is substance, which is separated from everything else and
is independently movable. [Notice that Kant says ‘filled space’—a
phrase that he uses quite often to mean ‘space filled with matter’. So the
mathematicians’ account of space as infinitely divisible stands firm even
if the space in question is thought of as ‘full of matter’, provided (Kant
warns) that this is left unexplained and (in particular) is not understood
as meaning that every part of space contains a material substance. To
the proposition that he is allowing the mathematicians to assert he might
give the label ‘the mathematical proposition of the infinite divisiblity of
matter’, setting this off against (a phrase that he does use) ‘the physical
proposition of the infinite divisibility of matter’.] So there has always
been something missing from mathematical proof ·of the
infinite divisibility of matter·, and there has been no guarantee that that proof could be securely applied in natural
science. This gap has now been filled—by ·my proof of·
Proposition 4 above. Now we have the physical proposition 506
of the infinite divisibility of matter; and when it comes to
25  
metaphysical attacks on that, the mathematician must ·back
off and· leave them entirely to the philosopher. When the
philosopher tries to deal with these attacks, he ventures into
a labyrinth that is hard enough to get through when he just
approaches it philosophically; he can do without interference
from mathematician! ·Here’s a sketch of the labyrinthine
problem· (stated for portions of matter, though it applies
equally to regions of space):
(a) A whole must already contain within itself all
the parts into which it can be divided. Therefore
(b) if matter is infinitely divisible, then it consists of
infinitely many parts. But (c) a portion of matter can’t
possibly have infinitely many parts, because (d) the
concept of infiniteness is the concept of something that
can’t ever be wholly complete, from which it follows
that ‘There are infinitely many of them, and they are
all there, complete, settled’ is self-contradictory.
That is the difficulty as it presents itself to the dogmatic
metaphysician, who is thinking of wholes as things in themselves, the crucial point being that proposition (a) is true
only of wholes considered as things in themselves. So we
have to choose between two options:
•Defy the geometer by denying (1) that space is divisible to infinity.
•Annoy the metaphysician by denying (2) that •matter
is a thing in itself and •space a property of a thing in
itself, saying instead that matter is a mere appearance
of our external senses and that space is just the
essential form of matter, ·i.e. of that appearance·.
The philosopher is now squeezed between the horns of a
dangerous dilemma. It’s no use denying (1) that space is
divisible to infinity; that’s a mathematical result, and you
can’t get rid of it by tricky argument! But regarding matter
as a thing in itself, and thus regarding space as a property
of things in themselves, is denying (1). So the philosopher
sees himself as forced to depart from the assertion (2) that
matter is a thing in itself and space a property of things
in themselves—maintaining instead that space is only the
form of our external sensible intuition [see note on page 8], so
that matter and space are not things in themselves but
only subjective modes of representation of objects that are
in themselves unknown to us. Proposition (2) is common
and commonsensical; the philosopher denies it only on the
understanding that this will get him out of the difficulty
about matter’s being infinitely divisible yet not consisting
of infinitely many parts. That matter consists of infinitely
many parts can indeed be thought by reason, though this
thought can’t be constructed and made intuitable [see note
on page 2]. If something x is •actual only by •being given in
a representation, all you are given ·when you think of it·
is what’s met with in the representation, i.e. as far as the
sequence of representations reaches. If something is an
appearance that can be divided to infinity, what can we say
about how many parts it has? Only that it has as many parts
as we give it, i.e. as many as result from whatever division of
it we choose to make. That’s because the parts of something 507
that is merely an appearance exist only in thought, i.e. only
in ·the thought of· the division itself. The division does
indeed go on to infinity, but it is never given as infinite; so
we can’t infer that the divisible item contains within itself
infinitely many parts ·that are things· in themselves existing
independently of our representation of them. Why can’t we?
Because the division that can be infinitely continued is the
division not •of the thing but only •of its representation. . . . A
great man who perhaps contributes more than anyone else to
the reputation of mathematics in Germany has several times
rejected the impudent metaphysical claim to overturn what
geometry teaches concerning the infinite divisibility of space.
26  
[Who? Leibniz is a good guess (see below), except that the tenses in the
foregoing sentence don’t seem right for someone who had been dead for
70 years when Kant wrote this work.] His basis for this rejection
was the reminder that space belongs only to the appearance
of external things; but his readers didn’t understand him.
They took him to mean:
M: Space is a thing in itself or a relation amongst
things in themselves; but it appears to us, and the
mathematicians ·aren’t vulnerable to metaphysical
attack because they· are talking only about space as
it appears, ·not about actual space itself·.
What they should have understood him to mean is this:
Space isn’t a property of anything outside of our
senses; it is only the subjective form of our sensibility.
Objects of our external senses appear to us under
this form, and we call this appearance matter. As for
what these objects are like ·in themselves·—we know
nothing about that.
According to the misinterpretation M, space was always
thought of as a quality that things have independently of
our power of representation, and the mathematicians ·were
being criticised because they· thought of this quality only
through common concepts (i.e. thought of it confusedly,
for appearance is commonly thought of confusedly). This
meant that according to M the geometricians had used
a •confused representation of space as their basis for a
mathematical proposition—asserting the infinite divisibility
of matter—which presupposes the highest •clarity in the
concept of space. Thus the door was left open for the
M-accepting metaphysicians to bring clarity into this concept
of space (they thought!) by supposing that space is made up
of points and matter is made up of simple parts, ·i.e. parts
that did not in their turn have parts·. This error was based
on another misinterpretation—namely a misunderstanding
of the monadology of Leibniz, which they saw as trying to
explain natural appearances whereas really it is a platonic
concept of the world. There’s nothing wrong with Leibniz’s
concept ·of the world as a system of sizeless monads·, as
long as the world is being regarded not as •an object of
the senses but as •a thing in itself, i.e. as merely an object
of the understanding, though it is the foundation of the
appearances of the senses. [From here down to the next mention
of Leibniz, this version expands on Kant’s words in ways that the ·small
dots· convention can’t easily signify.] Now, any composite thing
made up of things in themselves must certainly consist of
simple things, because a composite thing in itself can’t exist
except as an upshot of the existence of its parts, all its parts,
right down to the smallest ones that don’t have parts. But
a composite thing that is an appearance doesn’t consist of 508
simple things, because its parts exist only as upshots of
a division of the thing; so that they, rather than existing
independently of the composite thing of which they are parts,
exist only in that composite thing. For a thing in itself x:
x exists as an upshot of the putting together of its
parts;
whereas for an appearance y:
y’s parts exist as upshots of the division of y.
So it seems to me that Leibniz didn’t intend to explain space
in terms of an order of simple entities side by side, but
rather to claim that this order corresponds to space while
still belonging to a merely intelligible world that is unknown
by us. And this is to assert just what I said elsewhere [in the
Critique of Pure Reason], namely that space along with matter
. . . . doesn’t make up the world of things in themselves but
only the appearance of such a world, and that what space
itself is is only the form of our external sensible intuition.
27  
Proposition 5
The possibility of matter requires a force of attraction, as the
second essential basic force of matter.
Proof
Impenetrability, as the fundamental property of matter through
which it first reveals itself as something real in the space
of our external senses, is nothing but matter’s power of
extension (Proposition 2). Now, an essential moving force by
which parts of matter pull away from one another cannot
(1) be limited by itself, because such a force works on
matter to drive it towards continuously expanding the
space that it occupies;
and it cannot
(2) be kept within limits by space itself. Why not?
Because the most that space can do is to bring it
about that when the volume of a portion of matter is increasing the extensive force becomes correspondingly
weaker; such weakenings can go on to infinity—·the
strength of a force is continuous·—but they can’t
reach zero, which is to say that space can’t bring
it about that the extensive force stops.
Therefore, if matter were driven only by its repelling force
(the source of its impenetrability), with no other moving force
counteracting this repelling one, there would be nothing
to limit matter’s extension; every portion of matter would
disperse itself to infinity, so that no assignable quantity
[Quantität] of matter would be found in any assignable ·region
of· space. Consequently, if there were only repelling forces in
matter, all regions of space would be empty—so that strictly
speaking there wouldn’t be any matter! [The thought is this: Let
R be a region of space measuring a billion cubic kilometers, and let M
be a portion of matter weighing a billionth of a gram: if matter expanded
infinitely, there wouldn’t be as big a portion of matter as M in a space as
small as R, because that amount of matter would have been spread still
more thinly through a still larger region of space. Repeat the argument,
making M ever smaller and R ever larger; you will always have too much
matter for that amount of space.] For matter to exist, therefore,
it must have compressive forces opposed to the extensive 509
forces. ‘Might not the force that keeps material portion x
within limits be the ·expansive· force of a different portion y?’
No, that can’t be the basic account of the situation, because
this ‘different portion y’ can’t exist as matter unless some
compressive force is acting upon it. So we have to assume
that matter has a basic force acting in an opposite direction
to the repelling force; this force must tend to bring things
closer to one another, which is to say that it must be an
attractive force. Now, this attractive force is needed for any
matter to be possible, so it is more basic than any differences
between kinds of matter; and therefore it must be attributed
not merely to some one species of matter but to all matter.
Thus, a basic attraction belongs to all matter as a basic force
that is part of its essence.
Remark
We need to look more closely into what happens in our
thinking when when we move from •one property ·that is
contained in· the concept of matter to •a radically different
property that equally belongs to the concept of matter without being contained in it. If attractive force is basically
required for matter to be possible, why don’t we use it,
along with impenetrability, as the primary sign of matter?
Impenetrability is given immediately with the concept of
matter, while attraction isn’t thought in the concept but
only associated with it by inference—what’s going on here?
You might think: ‘Well, our senses don’t let us perceive
attraction as immediately as repulsion and the resistance
of impenetrability’—but that doesn’t properly answer the
28  
question. Suppose that we could perceive attraction as
easily as repulsion: our understanding would still choose to
differentiate space from matter—i.e. to designate substance
in space—in terms of the filling of space (otherwise known as
solidity). Attraction, however well we perceived it, ·couldn’t
do the job. It· would never reveal to us any portion of matter
with a definite volume and shape. All it could reveal to
us would be our perceiving organ’s being tugged towards a
point outside us, namely the central point of the attracting
body. [Translated more strictly, Kant speaks not of the organ’s being
tugged but of its ‘endeavouring’ to reach that external point. Either way,
it is initially surprising, but it is not unreasonable. How do we perceive
repelling forces? By feeling ourselves being pushed away from things.
So how would we (if we could) perceive attractive forces? By feeling
ourselves being pulled towards things! This interpretation presupposes
that the ‘perceiving organ’ is the perceiver’s body, the ‘organ’ of the sense
of touch.] That experience wouldn’t reveal to us any material
things with definite sizes and shapes, because the only way
the attractive force of all parts of the earth could affect
us is exactly the same as if that force were concentrated
entirely in the centre of the earth and this point alone were
tugging us; similarly with the attraction of a mountain, or of
a stone, etc.—the pull would always be to the central point,
and would give no sense of the relevant body’s shape or
510 size of even its location. (·Why not its location? Because·
although we would be able to perceive the direction of the
attraction, as it is perceived in our experience of weight, we
wouldn’t know how far away it was in that direction.) The
attracting point would be unknown, and I don’t see how
it could even be discovered through inferences unless we
already had perceptions of matter as filling space, ·i.e. as
having repelling force·. This makes it clear that our first
application of our concepts of size to matter. . . .is based
only on matter’s space-filling property. Through our sense
of touch this property tells us the size and shape of an
extended thing, thus creating the concept of a determinate
object in space—a concept that underlies everything else
that can be said about this thing. No doubt this is what
explains the fact that although there are very clear proofs
that attraction must belong to the basic forces of matter just
as much as repulsion does, there are people who strenuously
reject attractive forces and won’t allow matter to have any
forces except those of impact and pressure (both by means
of impenetrability). ‘What space is filled by is substance’,
they say; and this is correct enough, ·but its correctness
has led these people astray·. The substance that they talk
about reveals its existence to us through the sense by which
we perceive its impenetrability, namely the sense of touch;
so it reveals its existence only through the contact of one
portion of matter with another—a process that starts with
collision and continues with pressure. And because of this
it seems as though the only way for one material thing to
act immediately on another is by colliding with it or putting
pressure on it—these being the two influences that we can
immediately perceive. Whereas it’s very hard for us to think
of attraction as a basic force, because it doesn’t give us any
sensation at all, or anyway no definite object of sensation.
Proposition 6
Matter isn’t made possible by mere attraction, without repulsion.
Proof
Attractive force is the moving force of matter whereby one
material thing gets another to approach it. If every part of
the material world exercises such a force, all those parts are
led to cluster together, thus shrinking the region of space
that they jointly occupy. Now, the only thing that can block
29  
the action of a moving force is a moving force opposed to 511
it; and the force that is opposite to attraction is the force
of repulsion. If that didn’t exist, there would be nothing to
stop the force of attraction from pulling portions of matter
together closer and closer, constantly shrinking the region of
space containing matter. There would be no such thing as
two material things so close together that repelling
forces block them from coming even closer,
so that the force of attraction would eventually pull material
things closer and closer together until they shrank into a
mathematical point; and at that stage space would be empty,
i.e. wouldn’t contain any matter. So matter is impossible
through mere attractive forces without repelling ones. [Notice
the elegant shape of Kant’s arguments about the two kinds of force.
Allow only repulsion/expansion and matter is spread so widely and thus
thinly that it disappears; allow only attraction/contraction and matter is
packed so densely that it is all contained in a single point and disappears
from all space except that point.]
Note
Any property that is required for something to be intrinsically
possible (·whether or not possible in relation to other things·)
is itself an essential element of that intrinsic possibility. So
repelling force belongs to the essence of matter as much
as attractive force does—the two can’t be separated in the
concept of matter.
Remark
I had first to consider the forces of repulsion and attraction
•separately, in order to see what each on its own could
contribute to the presentation of matter. The upshot was
an a priori proof that they are both present, •united, in the
general concept of matter. We found that space remains
empty, with no matter to be found in it, unless both these
forces are at work in it. ·Why only these two forces—why
only repulsion and attraction?· Because they are the only
ones that are thinkable.
Definition 6
Contact in the physical sense is the immediate action and
reaction of impenetrability. The action of one portion of
matter on another when there is no contact between them
is action at a distance. When this action at a distance
occurs without the mediation of matter lying between the
two portions of matter it is called unmediated action at a 512
distance, or the action of portions of matter on one another
through empty space. [Kant’s word unmittelbar is usually translated
as ‘immediate’; and that is not incorrect. But it’s natural for us to think
of x’s ‘immediate’ influence on y as ruling out not only (a) any mediating
thing between them but also (b) any distance between x and y as well.
Therefore, in cases where Kant is ruling out (a) and emphatically not
ruling out (b), ‘unmediated’ will be used instead.]
Remark
Contact in the mathematical sense of the word is the shared
boundary of two regions of space—so it isn’t in either of
them. So straight lines can’t be in contact (in this sense)
with one another: when two straight lines have a point in
common, that is because they intersect, and their common
point belongs to each of them. But a circle and a straight
line can be in contact at a point, and so can a circle and
another circle; two planes can be in contact at a line, and two
solids can be in contact at a plane. Mathematical contact
lies at the basis of physical contact, but it doesn’t constitute
it. To get from the concept of mathematical contact to that of
physical contact you have to add the thought of a dynamical
relation—not that of the attractive forces but the relation of
the repelling ones, i.e. of impenetrability. Physical contact
30  
is the two-way interaction of repelling forces at the common
boundary of two portions of matter.
Proposition 7
The attraction that is essential to all matter is an unmediated
action through empty space of one portion of matter on
another.
Proof
The possibility of matter as the thing that fills a space in a
determinate degree depends on the basic attractive force,
and so the possibility of physical contact between portions
of matter also depends on it. [Until now Kant hasn’t spoken
explicitly of regions as being filled to a greater or lesser degree, more
or less intensively filled; but he has done so implicitly, by saying that
the repelling force that constitutes space-filling is a matter of degree, i.e.
can be more or less strong at a given point. This concept of the degree to
which a given region of space is filled will be crucially important in what
follows.] Thus, physical contact presupposes the attractive
force, so the force can’t depend on there being physical
contact. Now, the action of a moving force that •doesn’t
depend on any contact •doesn’t depend either on the filling
of space between the moving thing and the thing moved,
·because ‘the space between x and y is filled’ is equivalent
to ‘from x to y there is a series of portions of matter, each
in contact with the next’·. This means that such action
must occur without the intervening space being filled, and
so it’s action that operates through empty space. Therefore
the basic essential attraction of all matter is an unmediated
action of portions of matter upon one another through empty
space.
Remark 1
513 It is completely impossible to make any basic force conceivable, i.e. to present one or more other forces that somehow
give rise to it. Just because it is a basic force it can’t be
derived from anything.
[This use of ‘conceivable’ may seem odd. It comes from the fact that Kant
is running the proposition
The concept of attraction can’t be analysed into simpler or more
basic concepts
in the same harness as the proposition
The attractive force can’t be shown to be derived from and dependent on some more basic forces.
On page 40 we shall find Kant inferring from propositions of the type
The. . . force can’t be shown to be derived from and dependent on
some more basic forces
the corresponding propositions of the form
It isn’t possible for us to comprehend the possibility of the. . . force.
He regards this as an inevitable drawback of any theory that postulates
basic forces; but we’ll see that it’s a drawback he is willing to put up
with because of the advantages of that kind of theory.] But the basic
attractive force isn’t even slightly more inconceivable than
the basic force of repulsion. The difference is merely that the
basic attractive force doesn’t offer itself so immediately to
our senses as impenetrability—the repelling force—does in
giving us concepts of determinate objects in space. Because
it’s not •felt but only •inferred, the attractive force gives
the impression of being ·not a •basic force but· a •derived
one, as though repulsion were the upshot of a hidden play
of ·more basic· moving forces. But when we take a closer
look at attraction, we see that it can’t be derived from any
source, least of all from the moving force of portions of matter
through their impenetrability, because its action is exactly
the opposite of impenetrability. The most common objection
to unmediated action at a distance is the claim that a portion
of matter can’t directly act at a place if it isn’t there. ·But·
when the earth directly influences the moon to come closer,
it is acting unmediatedly on a thing thousands of miles away;
and the space between the earth and the moon might as well
be regarded as entirely empty, because even if there is matter
31  
there it has no effect on the attraction. So the earth acts
directly in a place without itself being there. That may seem
to be self-contradictory, but it isn’t. The truth of the matter
in fact is that whenever anything in space acts on anything
else, it acts in a place without itself being in it! If something
were to act in the same place where it itself is present, then it
wouldn’t be acting on anything outside it, but only on itself.
For a thing x to be ‘outside’ a thing y is for x to be in a place
that doesn’t have y in it. If the earth and the moon touched
each other, the point of contact would be a place that has
neither the earth nor the moon in it. . . . It wouldn’t even
have anyI part of either the earth or the moon in it, because
this point lies at the boundary of the two filled regions, and
this boundary isn’t a part of either of them. It follows from
this that the ·widely accepted· proposition that
•portions of matter cannot unmediatedly act on each
other at a distance
amounts to the proposition that
•portions of matter can’t unmediatedly [unmittelbar] act
on each other without the intervention [Vermittelung] of
the forces of impenetrability.
This amounts to saying that repelling forces are the only ones
by which portions of matter can be active, or at least that
they must be involved when portions of matter act on one
another; which implies that the force of attraction is either
•impossible or •always dependent on the action of repelling
forces; and there is no basis for either of those assertions.
The ·widespread· misunderstanding of this matter is a result
514 of confusing •the mathematical contact of regions of space
with •their physical contact through repelling forces. [The rest
of this paragraph expands Kant’s words in ways that the ·small dots·
convention can’t easily signal.] For x to attract y unmediatedly
and without contact is for this to be the case:
(1) x and y come closer together in accordance with
a constant law of the form ‘If two portions of matter
have relation R1 between them, they move towards
one another’.
And for x to repel y unmediatedly and without contact is for
this to be the case:
(2) x and y move away from one another in accordance
with a constant law of the form ‘If two portions of
matter have relation R2 between them, they move
away from one another’.
Now, there is not the slightest difficulty about supposing
that repelling force doesn’t come into R1 and that attractive
force doesn’t come into R2. These two moving forces are
wholly different in kind, and there’s not the slightest basis
for claiming, of either of them, that it depends on the other
and isn’t possible without the intervention of the other.
Remark 2
Attraction between two things that are in contact can’t result
in any motion. Why not? Because for two bodies to be in
contact is for the impenetrability of each to act against the
impenetrability of the other, and that impedes all motion. So
there must be some unmediated attraction without contact,
i.e. unmediated attraction at a distance. To see why, suppose
that it is not so, and see where you get. We have two bodies
that are approaching one another, without unmediated attraction being at work. In that case, the situation must be
that they are being pushed towards one another by forces
of pressure and impact. This is only apparent attraction,
as against true attraction in which repelling forces have no
role at all. But even such an apparent attraction must, deep
down, involve true attraction, because the portions of matter
whose pressure or impact is at work wouldn’t even be matter
if they didn’t have attractive forces (Proposition 5 [page 28]).
So the attempt to ·get rid of true attraction and· explain
32  
all phenomena of approach in terms of apparent attraction
moves in a circle.
There is a view about Newton that is widely accepted,
namely:
He didn’t see any need for his system to postulate
unmediated attraction of portions of matter. Behaving
strictly like a pure mathematician, he •kept right out
of this issue, •left the physicists completely free to
explain the possibility of such attraction in whatever
way they thought best, and •avoided mixing up his
propositions with their play of hypotheses.
But how could he establish the proposition that the universal
attraction of bodies—across a given distance—is proportional
to the quantity [Quantität] of matter in the bodies if he didn’t
assume that it’s an essential feature of matter as such,
·matter simply qua matter·, that it exercises this motive
force? For when one body pulls another, their approach
to one another (according to •the law of the equality of
515 reciprocal action) must always occur in inverse proportion
to ·the quantity of· the matter in those bodies—and it makes
no difference what kinds of matter are involved. Still, •this
law is not
a principle of •dynamics, i.e. a law about the distribution of attractive forces,
but rather
a law only of •mechanics, i,e, a law about the motions
that attractive forces cause.
And not just attractive forces; it is valid for moving forces
generally, of whatever kind. ·Here is an illustrative example·:
A magnet x is attracted by an exactly similar magnet
y on two occasions: on one occasion there are just
the two magnets, on the other occasion magnet y
is enclosed in a wooden box that weighs twice as
much as y does. On the second occasion, y-plus-box
will impart more relative motion to x than y alone
did on the first occasion, despite the fact that the
wood, which contributes to the quantity [Quantität] of
the matter in y-plus-box, adds nothing at all to y’s
attractive force and exerts no magnetic attraction.
Newton ·regarded attraction as something that all matter, of
whatever kind, must have. He· wrote:
‘If the ether or any other body had no weight, it would
differ from any other portion of matter only in its
form, so that it could be transformed little by little
through a gradual change of this form into a portion
of matter of the heaviest kind on earth; and conversely
the heaviest kind could become weightless through a
change of its form. This is contrary to experience’ and
so on. [Newton’s Principia II.vi.cor.2]
Thus he didn’t exclude even the ether (much less other kinds
of matter) from the law of attraction. If Newton held that
the approach of bodies to one another was a case of mere
apparent attraction, created ·somehow· by impact, what kind
of matter would he be left with to provide the impact? So you
can’t claim this great founder of the theory of attraction as
your predecessor, if you take the liberty of replacing the •true
attraction that he did maintain by an •apparent attraction
that forces you to explain the appproach of bodies in terms
of impact. ‘What causes the universal attraction of matter?’
Newton declined to get into any hypotheses to answer this
question; and he was right to do so, because the question
belongs to physics or metaphysics, not mathematics. It’s
true that in the preface of the second edition of his Optics
he says: ‘And to show that I do not take gravity to be an
essential property of bodies, I have added one question
concerning its cause’ and so on [Kant quotes this in Newton’s
Latin]. Well, perhaps he shared his contemporaries’ shock at
the concept of basic attraction, and was led by this to be at
33  
variance with himself. ·There can be no question of taking
that remark from the Optics as his most fundamental and
most considered view, because· he held that the attractive
forces that two planets. . . .exercise on their satellites (mass
unknown), when at the same distance from those satellites,
are proportional to the quantity [Quantität] of the matter in the
two planets; and he absolutely could not say this unless he
assumed that just by being matter they had attractive force,
in which case all matter must have it.
Definition 7
516
A superficial force is a moving force by which portions of
matter can directly act on one another only at the common
surface of their contact; a penetrating force is a moving
force by which one portion of matter can directly act on the
parts of another that are not at the surface of contact.
Note
The repelling force through which matter fills a space is a
mere superficial force. That is because the parts touching
each other limit one another’s sphere of action; the repelling
force can’t move any more distant part except by means of
those lying between. . . . On the other hand, no intervening
matter limits an attractive force. That kind of force enables
a portion of matter to •occupy a region of space without
filling it [see Remark on page 20]; and to •act through empty
space upon other distant portions of matter, without this
action’s being limited by any intervening matter. That is how
we must think of the basic ·force of· attraction that makes
matter itself possible. So it’s a penetrative force, and for
that reason alone it is always proportional to the quantity
[Quantität] of the matter.
Proposition 8
The basic attractive force, on which the very possibility of
matter depends, reaches out directly from every part of the
universe to every other part, to infinity.
Proof
Because the basic attractive force. . . .is essential to matter,
every portion of matter has it. Now, suppose there were a
distance beyond which the force of attraction didn’t reach: 517
what could explain this limitation of the sphere of its efficacy?
It would have to be explained either (a) by the matter lying
within this sphere or (b) by the sheer size of the sphere. It
couldn’t be (a), because this attraction is a penetrative force,
which acts unmediatedly at a distance; it goes across every
region of space as though the space were empty, unaffected
by any intervening portions of matter. And (b) can’t be right
either. Every case of attraction involves a moving force that
has a degree ·of strength·, given any such degree a smaller
one is thinkable, and then one smaller than that. . . and so on
to infinity. Now, the great distance between two portions of
matter would reduce the strength of the attraction between
them—reducing it in inverse proportion to the amount of the
diffusion of the force—but it wouldn’t destroy the attractive
force between them completely. So there is nothing that
could bring about a limit to the sphere of efficacy of the basic
attraction of any part of matter, so this attraction reaches
throughout the universe to infinity.
Note 1
We have here a basic attractive force—a penetrating force—
which is exercised
•by every portion of matter (in proportion to its quantity [Quantität] of matter), •upon all portions of matter,
•across any possible distance.
34  
From this force, in combination with the opposing repelling
force, it must be possible to derive the limitation of the
repelling force and hence the possibility of the filling of a
region of space to a determinate degree. And in this way
the dynamical concept of matter as what is movable, and
fills a region of space to some determinate degree can be
constructed. This construction requires a law governing how
basic attraction and basic repulsion relate to one another at
various distances. Finding this relation is a purely mathematical problem, because the relation rests solely on •the
opposite directions of these two forces (one drawing points
together, the other pushing them apart) and on •the size
of the space into which each force diffuses itself at various
distances; metaphysics has nothing to do with this. If the
attempt to construct matter in this way meets with failure,
that won’t be the fault of metaphysics. Its only responsibility
518 is for the correctness of the elements of the construction that
reason leads us to; it isn’t responsible for the insufficiency
and limitedness of our reason in doing the construction.
Note 2
Each portion of matter succeeds in being a determinate material thing only by filling a region of space with a determinate
degree of repelling force; and such a filling of a determinate
region of space can happen only through a conflict between a
basic attraction and the basic repulsion. Now, the attraction
involved in this filling of a determinate region of space may
arise either ·internally· from •the attractions that the parts of
the compressed matter exert on one another or ·externally·
from •the attraction exerted upon this compressed matter
by all the matter of the world. The basic attraction is proportional to the quantity [Quantität] of matter, and it reaches
to infinity. So the only way a determinate region of space
can be filled by matter is through matter’s infinitely-reaching
attraction; such a determinate degree of the filling of space
can then be imparted to every portion of matter in accordance
with the degree of its repelling force. The action of universal
attraction—exercised by all matter directly on all matter
and at all distances—is called gravitation; the endeavour
[see long note on page 19] to move in the dominant gravitational
direction is weight. The action of the universal repelling
force of the parts of each portion of matter is called its
basic elasticity. Weight involves an external relation, while
elasticity is internal. These two are the only a priori comprehensible universal characteristics of matter; ·they are a priori
graspable because· they are the foundations on which rests
the very possibility of matter. When cohesion is explained
as the reciprocal attraction of portions of matter that are in
contact with one another, it doesn’t belong to the possibility
of matter in general and therefore can’t be known a priori to
be bound up with matter. This property ·of cohesion through
contact· would be physical, not metaphysical, so it wouldn’t
belong to our present considerations.
Remark 1
I can’t forbear adding a small preliminary remark for the sake
of any attempt that may be made toward such a possible
construction.
(1) Let F be some force—any force—that acts unmediatedly at different distances, with the amount of moving
force that it exerts at any given point being limited only 519
by how far it had to travel to reach that point. However
much or little space F is spread through, the total amount
of it is the same; but the intensity of its action upon a
given point x will always be inversely proportional to the
space F had to get through to reach x. Think of light being
propagated from a point P, surrounded by a series of spheres
each with P as its centre. The total amount of light falling
on any sphere is the same as the total amount falling on
35  
any other; but the amount of light falling on (say) a square
inch of one sphere will be greater than the amount falling
on a square inch of a larger sphere. And that’s how it is
with all other forces, and the laws according to which these
forces must diffuse themselves, either in two dimensions
or in three, in order to act according to their nature upon
distant objects. If you want to do a drawing of the diffusion
of a moving force from one point, it is better not to do it
in the ordinary way (as in optics, for example), namely by
means of straight-line rays diverging from a central point.
However many lines you put into such a diagram, they’ll
get further apart the further they get from the central point;
so they can never fill the space through which they pass
or (therefore) fill the surface that they reach. This makes
them a source of troubles that can be avoided if we ·get rid
of straight-line rays, and· think of the situation merely in
terms of the size of the whole spherical surface that is to
be uniformly illuminated by the same quantity [Quantität] of
light, so that—quite naturally—the intensity of illumination
of any given area of a surface is inversely proportional to
the size of the whole surface; and similarly with every other
diffusion of a force through spaces of different sizes.
(2) If the force is an unmediated attraction at a distance,
the lines of the direction of the attraction must be represented as rays not •diverging from the attracting point but,
rather •converging at the attracting point from all points
of the surrounding spherical surface. Why? Because the
line of direction of the motion to this point—a point that
causes the motion and is its goal—assigns the points from
which the lines must begin, namely from all points of the
surface. These lines get their direction from this surface to
the attracting centre ·of the sphere·, and not vice versa. For
only the size of the surface determines how many lines there
are; the centre leaves this undetermined.2
(3) If the force is an unmediated repulsion by which a 520
point. . . .fills a space dynamically, and if the question is
What law of infinitely small distances (here = contacts)
governs how a basic repelling force acts at different
distances?. . . .
then it is even further from being correct to represent this
force by diverging rays of repulsion coming from the repelling
point, even though the direction of the motion has this point
as its starting-point. That’s because the space in which
the force must be diffused in order to act at a distance is
a corporeal space that is to be thought of as filled. There’s
no way of mathematically representing how a point can dynamically fill a space; and the repelling force of a corporeally
filled space can’t possibly be represented by diverging rays
coming from a point. What we must do, rather, is to assign a
value to the repulsion at various infinitely small distances of
these mutually repelling points simply in inverse proportion 521
to the ·volumes of the· corporeal spaces that each of these
points dynamically fills, so that the value will be in inverse
2 It’s impossible to represent surfaces at given distances as wholly
filled with the action of lines spreading out from a point like rays,
whether the action is illumination or attraction. Draw the situation
in that way and you make it look as though the inferior illumination of a distant spherical surface consists in its having relatively
large unilluminated and widely spaced illuminated ones! Euler’s
hypothesis ·that light consists of waves, not streams of particles·
avoids this inconvenience, but at the cost of making it harder to get
a conception of the rectilinear motion of light. [The footnote goes on
at some length, recommending that we think of light as consisting
not of waves or of straight-line streams of particles but rather an
infinitely divisible fluid. Kant seems to acknowledge that there is no
convenient way to draw this account of the matter; and recommends
that we resort to the device of straight-line rays but only after getting
firmly and clearly in mind what the truth is, so as not to be misled
by the lines.]
36  
proportion to the cube of the distances of these points from
one another. . . .
(4) So the basic attraction of matter would act in inverse
proportion to the square of the distance—any distance—
while the basic repulsion would act in inverse proportion to
the cube of the infinitely small distances. It’s that action
and reaction of the two fundamental forces that make ·a
portion of· matter possible, by filling its space to a determinate degree. The point is that as parts move closer
together the •repulsion between them increases faster than
the •attraction does; and that sets a limit to the approach—
the limit at which the available attractive force loses out to
the available repelling force—and that limit determines how
intensely the space is filled.
Remark 2
I’m well aware of the difficulty about this way of explaining
the possibility of a portion of matter ·considered as separate
from other portions of matter·. It consists in the fact that if
a point can’t unmediatedly [see note on page 30] drive another
point by repelling force without at the same time filling the
whole intervening corporeal space with its force, then it
seems to follow that this ·intervening· space must contain
several driving points. That conflicts with the hypothesis
·of the discussion, namely that we are talking here about
action at a distance·, and it was ruled out above through
the label ‘sphere of repulsion of the simple in space’. [Ruled
out where? Kant cites Proposition 4, but that seems wrong. Definition 6
is better, though neither there nor anywhere else has he spoken of ‘the
repulsion of the simple’.] But we should distinguish •the concept
of an actual region of space, which could exist, from •the
mere idea of
a region of space that •is entertained in thought only
for the purpose of determining how various given
regions are inter-related, but •isn’t in fact a region of
space.
[See note on Idee on page 9.] In the case cited of a supposed
physical monadology, there were to be actual spaces that
were filled by a point dynamically, i.e. through repulsion;
for they existed as points before any possible production of
matter from these points, and through the proper sphere of
their activity they fixed the part of the space to be filled that
could belong to them. In this physical monadology, therefore,
matter can’t be regarded as infinitely divisible and as a continuous quantum, because the parts that unmediatedly repel
one another are at a determinate distance from one another
(the sum of the radii of their spheres of repulsion); whereas
the thought of matter as a continuous quantity [Größe] doesn’t
allow for any distance between the unmediately repelling
parts, or, therefore, for any increase or decrease of the
spheres of their unmediated activity. However, portions
of matter can expand or be compressed (like the air), and
·within the framework of the physical monadology· this can
be represented in terms of increase and decrease of the
distance between their nearest parts. But ·in actual fact·
the closest parts of a continuous portion of matter touch
one another, even when it is being expanded or compressed;
so their distances from one another have to be thought of 522
as infinitely small, and this infinitely small space must be
understood to be filled in a greater or lesser degree [see note
on page 21] by their force of repulsion. But two things’ •having
an infinitely small space between them is their •being in
contact. Hence it is only the idea of space that enables us
to intuit [= ‘see in our mind’s eye’] the expansion of matter as
a continuous quantity [Größe], although it can’t actually be
conceived in this way. Thus, when it is said that the repelling
forces that two parts of matter unmediatedly exercise on one
another are
37  
•in inverse proportion to the cube of the distance
between them,
this means only that they are
•in inverse proportion to the corporeal spaces that one
thinks of between the parts,
though in fact the parts are immediately in contact (which
is why we have to call the distance between them ‘infinitely
small’ so as to distinguish it from every actual distance). We
mustn’t raise any objection to a concept itself because of
difficulties in the construction of it or rather in the misinterpretation of the construction of it. . . .
The universal law of dynamics would in both cases be
this:
•The action of the moving force that one point exerts
on each other point external to it is inversely proportional to •the space through which that moving force
has had to spread in order to act unmediatedly upon
the other point at the given distance.
From the law that the parts of matter basically repel one
another in inverse cubic proportion to their infinitely small
distances, there must necessarily follow a law of the expansion and compression of these parts that is entirely different
from Mariotte’s law regarding the air. Mariotte’s law proves
that the forces causing the closest parts of the air to move
away from one another are in inverse proportion to the distances between parts (Newton proves this in the scholium to
Proposition 23 of Book II of the Principia). But the expansive
force of the parts of the air can’t be an example of the action
of basic repelling forces. Why not? Because this expansive
force comes from heat, which compels the proper parts of the
air (which, incidentally, are at actual distances from each
other) to move away from one another, doing this, apparently,
by vibrations. . . . But the laws of the communication of
motion through the vibration of elastic portions of matter
make it easy to conceive that these ·heated-air· vibrations
give to the air’s parts a force that •causes them to move
away from one another and •stands in inverse proportion to
the distances between the parts. [The phrase ‘communication of
motion’ is a common translation of the German Mitteilung der Bewegung.
It would be closer to the German to put ‘sharing of motion’, but we would
have to remember to liken this to ‘thank you for sharing that news with
me’ rather than to ‘thank you for sharing your cake with me’. Or we
might use ‘the passing on of motion’; but on page 56 Kant writes about
those who thought of the Mitteilung der Bewegung as a literal passing
over of some motion, from one body that loses it to another that gains it.
That is one theory about this phenomenon; so terminology that strongly
suggests it can’t be used as a neutral name for the phenomenon.] But
let me explain: I do not want my exposition of the law of
basic repulsion to be seen as essential to the aim of my
metaphysical treatment of matter. All I needed for that 523
treatment was to present the filling of space as a dynamic
property of matter; and I don’t want that to be mixed up
with the disputes and doubts that might arise from ·further
details of· my exposition.
GENERAL NOTE ON DYNAMICS
Looking back over everything I have said about the metaphysical treatment of matter, we find that the treatment has
dealt with
(1) what is real in space (otherwise known as what is
‘solid’) in its filling of space through repelling force;
(2) what relates in a negative way to the real in space
. . . ., namely, attractive force, ·which negates the real
in space in the sense that· if this attractive force were
left to itself it would permeate the whole of space and
completely abolish everything solid;
(3) the limitation of (1) by (2), yielding an empirically
accessible degree of the filling of space.
38  
So we see that the quality of matter has been completely dealt
with under the headings of reality, negation, and limitation.
When I say ‘completely dealt with’, I mean that the treatment
contains everything needed for a metaphysical dynamics.
[The terms ‘reality’ etc. are Kant’s labels for the categories of Quality in
his Critique of Pure Reason.]
GENERAL REMARK ON DYNAMICS
In what I am about to say, I use ‘real’ [German real, from Latin
res = ‘thing’] to apply only to things and not to mere states or
qualities; for example a thing’s location and size and shape
are not real because they are not themselves things but are
spatial qualities of things. Now, the universal principle of
the dynamics of material Nature is this:
Everything that is real in the objects of our external
senses must be regarded as a moving force.
This principle banishes from natural science the empty
concept of the so-called solid, i.e. the concept of absolute
impenetrability, and replaces it by the concept of repelling
force. On the other hand, the true and unmediated attraction
is •defended against all the bad arguments of a metaphysics
that misunderstands itself, and •is explained as a fundamental force that is necessary for the very possibility of the
concept of matter. One consequence of this is that we can if
necessary think of space as filled throughout but in varying
degrees, ·so that we can think of a portion of matter as light
or soft or undense· without having to suppose that it has
pockets of empty space scattered through it. To understand
this, consider these two:
(1) The basic repelling forces of matter, which are the
basis for matter’s first property, namely the filling of
space;
(2) The basic attraction of matter—the attraction that
every portion of matter exerts on every other and also 524
the attraction that holds the portion together as a
unit.
Now, (1) doesn’t run in harness with (2); on the contrary, we
can think of their relationship to one another as infinitely
diverse. This is because (2) rests on the amount [Menge]
of matter in a given space, while (1) matter rests on the
degree to which the space is filled—and this degree can vary
enormously (as the same quantity [Quantität] of air in the
same volume exhibits more or less elasticity according to its
temperature). The underlying difference is this:
(2) in true attraction all particles of matter act directly on
all other particles of matter; whereas
(1) by expansive force there is only action between the
particles at the surface of contact between the two
portions, and it makes no difference what the state
of affairs is—whether there is much or little of this
matter—behind this surface.
All this brings a great advantage to natural science, by
relieving it of the burden of imagining a world built up out
of full ·parts of space· and empty ones, allow it instead to
think of all regions of space as full, but filled in varying
measure [= ‘in different degrees’]. This at least deprives empty
space of its status as necessary. It used to be thought of
as required to explain differences in the weight or density
etc. of different portions of matter, but now the thesis that
there is absolutely empty space is reduced to the status
of an hypothesis. [From here to the end of this chapter Kant will
repeatedly contrast two different accounts of the fundamental nature of
the physical world. To make it easier to keep the thread, the two will be
given numerical labels within curly brackets, which aren’t used for any
other purpose in this document.]
[Kant begins his next paragraph by speaking of the advantage that {2} ‘a methodically employed metaphysics’ has over
39  
{1} ‘principles that are also metaphysical but haven’t been
subjected to the test of criticism’. That last word translates
Kritik, which occurs in the German title of the Critique of Pure
Reason. Its appearance here is sudden and surprising; it
hasn’t occurred earlier in this work except as part of that title;
but Kant evidently expects us to gather that the difference
between
{1} the common atomist metaphysic that deals in basic
solidity, absolute impenetrability, and empty space
and
{2} his metaphysic of basic forces and degrees of
intensity of fullness of space
is the difference between {1} a metaphysic that •hasn’t been
subjected to the kind of criticism that is central to the
Critique of Pure Reason and {2} a metaphysic that •has. He
says that the advantage of {2} over {1} is ‘apparently only
negative’. (Perhaps his thought is that {2} seems at first sight
to do nothing but stop {1} from saying some of the things it
is saying.) Anyway, {2} does in an indirect way enlarge the
scope of the investigator of Nature, Kant continues:] because
the conditions by which he previously limited his field, and
by which all basic moving forces were philosophized away,
now lose their validity, ·so that he has at his disposal some
good concepts that he had thought were illegitimate; and
that advantage is not ‘only negative’·. But he—·this liberated
investigator of Nature·—must be careful not to go beyond
what makes the •universal concept of matter in general
possible by trying to explain a priori any •specific facts about
kinds of matter, let alone facts about •particular material
things. The concept of matter is reduced to nothing but
moving forces; that was to be expected, because in space
the only activity, the only change, that is conceivable is
motion. But who would claim to comprehend the possibility
of fundamental forces? [See note on ‘conceivable’ on page 31.]
They can only be assumed; ·and it is all right to assume
them· if they inseparably belong to a concept that is provably
basic and not further derivable from any other (such as the
concept of the filling of space). These basic forces are the
•repelling forces in general and the counteracting •attractive
forces in general. We can quite well form a priori judgments
concerning their inter-relations and consequences; the investigator is free to think up any relations he likes among
these forces, provided he doesn’t contradict himself. But he
mustn’t assume either of them as actual, because he is flatly
not entitled to set up a hypothesis unless the possibility of
what is assumed in it is entirely certain; and the possibility
of the basic forces can never be comprehended ·and so can
never be entirely certain·. And this points to an advantage
that {1} the mathematico-mechanical kind of definition has
over {2} the metaphysico-dynamical kind, namely: Starting 525
with
(a) a single completely homogeneous basic kind of
material
—·namely absolutely solid matter·—this {1} mathematicomechanical mode can provide for a great variety of sorts
of matter that differ in density and (if it adds forces from
outside the basic material) different modes of action. To do
this, it needs the help of
(b) the different shapes that matter can have, and
(c) empty spaces between the portions of matter,
·But the addition of those two doesn’t weaken the system
in any way·, because the possibility of (b) the shapes and
of (c) the empty intermediate spaces can be proved with
mathematical evidentness. In contrast with this, if {2} the
basic •material is transformed into basic •forces, then we
don’t have the means for constructing this concept or for
presenting as possible in intuition what we thought universally. Why not? Because there’s no secure way of explaining
40  
different sorts of matter in terms of different patterns of
the basic forces; indeed, we can’t even determine a priori
what the laws are that govern those forces. But {1} a merely
mathematical physics pays a high price for that advantage,
because •it has to base itself on an empty concept (absolute
impenetrability), and because •it must forgo all matter’s
own forces, ·and make do with forces from outside·. ·And in
addition to those two defects, {1} also runs a risk·: Employing
its basic patterns of portions of solid matter interspersed
with empty spaces, it is required to provide explanations
·of the variety in sorts of matter·, and this requires it to
allow—and to insist on its right to—a greater freedom of
imagination than is prudent.
Starting with {2} basic forces I can’t adequately show
the possibility of matter or explain the different sorts of
matter. But all that variety can be brought a priori under
a few intermediate headings, and I do hope to present a
complete account of those. (Not that this will provide a way
of conceiving the possibility of matter.). . . . ·This material
will be presented in four groups·.
(i) A body in the physical sense of the word is a portion of
matter that has determinate boundaries and therefore has
a shape. The size of the space within these boundaries is
the body’s volume. The degree to which a space is filled is
called density. . . . The {1} system of absolute impenetrability
provides for something to have absolute density, by having a
portion of matter that has absolutely no empty spaces inside
it. Using this concept of the filling of space, one portion of
matter counts as less dense than another if it contains less
empty space than the other, the extreme case being that of
a portion of matter that is called perfectly dense because
there is no empty space within its boundaries. The phrase
‘perfectly dense’ has a use in the context of {1} the merely
mathematical concept of matter, and only there. In {2} the
dynamical system, which has only relative impenetrability,
there is no maximum or minimum of density. In that context
any portion of matter can be called ‘fully dense’ if it has no
empty spaces within its boundaries. i.e. if it is a continuum 526
and not an interruptum; and this implies nothing about
how thin—·airy, light, etc.·—it is. And one portion of matter
counts as ‘less dense’, in {2} the dynamical sense, than
another if it entirely fills its space but not to the same degree
as the other. But even in the dynamical system it’s not
satisfactory to make a ‘density’ comparison between two
portions of matter unless they are homogeneous with one
another, ·i.e. of the same kind·, so that one can be produced
from the other by mere compression. Now, it doesn’t appear
to be essential to the nature of matter as such that any
portion of it could be made indistinguishable from any other
by compression, we shouldn’t make density comparisons
between heterogeneous portions or kinds of matter, as people
customarily do when they say that water is less dense than
mercury. [The {1}/{2} labelling will turn up again on page 46.]
(ii) Attraction when considered as acting between things
that are in contact is called cohesion.
(It’s true that some very good experiments have shown
that the force that is called ‘cohesion’ when it operates
between things that are in contact with one another is
also active at a very small distance. But attraction across
small distances is hardly perceivable; so when we speak
of ‘cohesion’ we are thinking of things that are in contact.
Cohesion is commonly taken to be a property that all matter
has—not •derivable from the concept of matter but •shown
by experience to be a feature of all matter. This universality
mustn’t be misunderstood as meaning (a) that every portion
of matter is constantly exerting this kind of attraction on
every other portion of matter —like gravitation—but rather
as meaning (b) that every portion of matter acts in this way
41  
on any other portion of matter that comes into contact
with it. [Kant describes these two versions of the force’s
universality as ‘collective’ (he could have said ‘conjuctive’)
and ‘disjunctive’ respectively: in (a) a portion x acts in the
relevant way on y and z and w and. . . etc, while in (b) it
acts on y or w or z or. . . and so on, depending on which
of these comes into contact with it.] For that reason, and
also because this attraction is not a penetrating force but
only a superficial one (there’s plenty of evidence for that),
its strength isn’t always proportional to the density ·of the
matter involved·. What is needed for two portions of matter to
cohere with full strength is for them to be first fluid and then
rigid; . . . . when a looking-glass has a crack across it, the
portions of glass on the two sides of the crack are nowhere
near to being as strongly attracted as they were when they
became solid after being fluid. For all these reasons I regard
this attraction-in-contact as only a derivative force of nature,
not a fundamental one. But more of this later.)
A portion of matter is fluid if any moving force, however
small, is sufficient to re-arrange its parts. The parts of a
portion of matter are re-arranged when they are made to
527 switch places while remaining completely in contact with
one another. Portions of matter—including the parts of a
portion of matter—are separated if they lose all contact
with one another or the amount of contact is lessened. A
rigid body is one whose parts can’t be re-arranged by any
force—so these parts must be resisting re-arrangement by
a certain degree of force ·of their own·. The resistance to
the re-arrangement of portions of matter is friction. The
resistance to the separation of portions of matter that are
in contact is cohesion. So fluid portions of matter don’t
undergo friction when they divide; and where friction is
found the portions of matter are assumed to be more or less
rigid, at least in their smaller parts. . . . A rigid body is brittle
if its parts can’t be re-arranged without its breaking, so that
the way its parts cohere can’t be changed without its losing
cohesion altogether. It is quite wrong to say (·as some do·)
that •the difference between fluid and solid portions of matter
comes from the •difference in the degree to which their parts
cohere. When we call a portion of matter ‘fluid’, we aren’t
talking about •how resistant it is to being broken apart, but
only about •how resistant it is to being re-arranged. Its
•cohesion can be as strong as you like, but its •resistance to
re-arrangement equals zero. Consider a drop of water. If a
particle within the drop is drawn to one side by a very strong
attraction of the parts touching it on that side, then it will
be drawn just as strongly to the opposite side; and since the
attractions cancel out, the particle is as easily movable as if
it were in empty space. That’s because any force that might
move it has no cohesion to overcome; the only resistance
to it would be the matter’s so-called inertia, and that has
to be overcome in making any matter move, even matter
that doesn’t cohere at all. Therefore, a microscopic bug
will move as easily within this drop as if there were no
cohesion to overcome. For in fact it doesn’t have to lessen
the water’s cohesion—to pull particles of the water apart
from one another—but only to re-arrange them. [Kant goes
on to explain that if the bug tries to escape from the drop,
then it does now have to overcome the water’s cohesion, but
not in a way that lessens the strength of the water’s holding
together as a cohering drop. He continues:] So it is clear that
an increase of the cohesion of the parts of a portion of matter
hasn’t the slightest effect on its fluidity. Water coheres in
its parts much more strongly than is commonly thought. . . . 528
What is quite decisive with regard to our concept of fluidity
is this: fluid portions of matter can be defined as those in
which the forces exerted by or acting upon each point are the
same in every direction. The first law of hydrostatics is based
42  
on the property of fluidity; and it can’t be a property of an
aggregation of smooth solid particles . . . . The considerations
we are in among here enable us to show that fluidity is a
basic property. ·If it were not basic but derivative, there
would be portions of matter that were very but not perfectly
fluid, and there aren’t any·. If in a fluid portion of matter
there was a tiny hindrance to re-arrangement and hence
a tiny amount of friction, this friction would grow with the
strength of the pressure with which the portion’s parts are
pressed against one another, and a strong enough pressure
would have the effect that the parts of this portion of matter
couldn’t be re-arranged by any small force, ·i.e. the effect
that the portion would no longer be fluid·. ·Here is a concrete
example·:
Take a U-shaped tube, of which one arm is very wide
and the other very narrow (but not as narrow as a
capillary, ·because that would have effects that would
cloud our result·). Let both arms be a few hundred feet
high. According to the laws of hydrostatics, the fluid in
the narrow arm would reach exactly the height of the
fluid in the wide arm (they are arms of a single tube).
But now let us keep adding fluid to the tube, steadily
increasing the pressure on the matter at the bottom
of the tubes. It there were the tiniest potentiality
for friction there, then at some height-of-fluid the
movement of matter between the arms would stop:
adding a small quantity of water to the narrower tube
wouldn’t affect the height of the water in the wider
529 tube; so that the narrow arm’s column of fluid could
be made to rise higher and higher above the wider
arm’s column.
And this is contrary to experience and even to the concept
of fluidity. The same thing holds if, instead of unlimited
pressure by weight, we postulate unlimited cohesion of the
parts. I have presented two definitions of fluidity:
(a) A portion of matter is fluid if any moving force,
however small, is sufficient to re-arrange its parts.
(b) Fluid portions of matter can be defined as those in
which the forces exerted by or acting upon each point
are the same in every direction.
We can derive (b) from the conjunction of (a) and the (c) principle of general dynamics saying that all matter is basically
elastic, as follows: A portion of matter that is (c) elastic will
resist, by stretching, any force of compression to which it is
subjected; and if it is (a)-fluid, its force of recovery will equal
the force of compression (nothing will be lost to friction);
which is to say that the forces at work in it will be the
same in every direction, i.e. that this portion of matter is
(b)-fluid. So friction, properly so-called, can be had only by
rigid portions of matter. . . . Some portions of matter that may
have no more force of cohesion than some fluids nevertheless
strongly resist the re-arrangement of their parts, so that they
can’t be pulled apart except by destroying the cohesion of
all parts in a given surface, thus creating an illusion that
they do have more cohesion. ·An example would be a cake
of chocolate: you can break it in two, but you can’t pull the
two halves of it apart·. Such portions are rigid bodies. But
why this is so, i.e. how rigid bodies are possible, is still an
unsolved problem, though the ordinary doctrine of Nature
[see note on page 1] thinks it has easily solved it.
(iii) A portion of matter may be able, after it has been
deformed by an external force, to regain its original size and
shape when the deforming force is removed; that ability is
elasticity. When something can return to its previous size
after being compressed, that is expansive elasticity; something that returns to its previous size after being stretched
has attractive elasticity. The elasticity that consists only in
the recovery of the previous shape is always attractive—e.g.
43  
with a bent sword in which the parts on the convex surface
have been pulled away from one another and try to resume
their former closeness to one another. . . . (Attractive elasticity
. . . . is obviously •derivative. An iron wire stretched by a
weight springs back into its original size when the weight
is removed. The attraction we have here is the cause of the
cohesion of the wire. . . . Expansive elasticity, on the other
530 hand, may be either •basic or •derivative. Every portion of
matter must, just because it is matter, have basic elasticity,
but some also have derived elasticity. [Kant cites the example
of hot air, which he thinks has—in addition to its basic
elasticity—–a further elasticity from being hot. He thinks
that air’s being hot is its being mixed with a special fluid, and
that the elasticity of this—which may be basic—is passed on
to or shared by the air. Finally:] It isn’t always possible to
know for sure whether a given instance of elasticity is basic
or derived.
(iv) When moving bodies collide and alter one anothers’
motion, that is called mechanical action. When a body is
at rest [= ‘motionless’] as a whole though its parts are moving around within it and interacting, their action is called
chemical. When this chemical influence has the effect of
pulling apart the parts of a portion of matter ·and inserting
between them parts of another portion·, it is called dissolving. When the influence has the effect of separating out two
portions of matter that have been dissolved in one another,
it is called chemical analysis. . . . Absolute dissolving is
the dissolving-in-one-another of two portions of matter of
different kinds—·call them X and Y·—in such a way that
every part of the X portion is united with a part of the Y
portion in the same proportion as that of the solution as a
whole. ·For example, if 5 units of X matter are merged into
10 units of Y matter, and this is ‘absolute’ dissolving, then
in the resultant solution every part, however small, consists
of one third X and two thirds Y.· This could also be called
chemical penetration. (Whether the dissolving forces that
actually occur in Nature are capable of bringing about a
complete ·or absolute· dissolving doesn’t have to be decided
here. Here the question is only whether such a solution can
be thought of.) Obviously if the parts of a dissolved portion
of matter are still particles, it is as possible for •them to be
dissolved as it was for •the larger parts to be dissolved; and
if the dissolving force continues, it’s not merely possible but
inevitable that the dissolving will continue until every part
of the solution is composed of X matter and Y matter in
the same proportion as they have in the solution as a whole.
Because in this case every part of the solution contains a part
of the X matter, this matter must completely fill the volume
in a continuous way. And the same holds for the Y matter.
And when each of two portions of matter entirely fill a single
space, they penetrate one another. That is why a perfect ·or
absolute· chemical dissolving would involve penetration of
the portions of matter. This chemical penetration would be
entirely different from mechanical penetration. In the latter,
the thought is that as ·two· portions of matter approach one
another the repelling force of one could entirely outweigh
that of the other, so that the extent of one or both of these
portions of matter is reduced to nothing. In contrast with
that, in chemical penetration each portion of matter retains 531
its extent, but the portions are not outside one another but
within one another. . . . It’s hard to see any objection to the
thesis that such perfect dissolving is possible, and thus that
chemical penetration is possible. It does involve a completed
division to infinity, ·and that seems to clash with the thesis
that an infinite such-and-such is one that ‘can’t ever be
wholly complete’· [see page 26], but:
(a) There there is no contradiction in this case of infinite
division, because the dissolving takes place contin-
44  
uously throughout a period of time, i.e. through an
infinite series of ever-shorter moments.
(b) Moreover, as the division proceeds the sums of the
surfaces of the not-yet-divided portions of matter
increase; and since the dissolving force acts continuously, the whole dissolving can be completed in a
specifiable time.
If you think you can’t conceive of such a chemical penetration
of two portions of matter, that will be because the divisibility
to infinity of every continuum in general really is inconceivable. If you won’t accept this complete dissolving ·of one kind
of matter in another· then you’ll have to settle for an account
that ends with certain small particles of the dissolved matter
swimming around in the solvent at fixed distances from
one another; these are still divisible portions of matter but
·according to you· they aren’t also dissolved, and you won’t
be able to give the slightest explanation of why! It may
be true in Nature, as far as our experience goes, that the
solvent goes a certain distance and doesn’t act further, ·but
that is beside my present point·. My question concerns the
possibility of a dissolving force that acts on smaller and
smaller particles until the dissolving is completed. The
volume of the resultant solution can be equal to the sum of
the volumes of the two portions of matter before the mixture,
or it can be smaller than this sum, or even larger than it,
depending on how the attractive forces relate to the repelling
forces, These mutually dissolving portions of matter constitute in solution, each of itself and both combined, an elastic
medium. This elasticity provides the only sufficient reason
why the dissolved X matter doesn’t by its weight pull itself
out from the Y solvent; it’s because the solvent Y’s attraction,
since it occurs equally strongly toward all sides, destroys the
resistance of the X dissolved matter. . . . [The next sentence and
a half expands Kant’s words in ways that the convention of ·small dots·
can’t easily indicate.] You might want to suggest that chemical
dissolving will never be complete because the Y solvent will
always be somewhat viscous, i.e. a bit thick and sticky. But
that thought rests on the assumption that all dissolving
consists in some X matter’s coming apart and allowing some
more fluid Y matter to flow between the parts; and this view
of what dissolving is doesn’t fit with the great force that the
more solvent fluids exert on dissolved portions of matter—e.g.
the action of dilute acids on metals. They don’t merely
touch the metallic bodies, which is what would happen if the
particles of metal merely swam in the acid; rather, the acids
exert great attractive force to pull these bodies apart and
disperse them throughout the entire space of the containing
flask. And another point: Even if •our knowledge and skills
didn’t put at our disposal any chemical forces of dissolving
that could bring about a complete dissolving, •Nature might
exhibit such forces in the operations of plants and animals,
perhaps producing portions of matter that were products
of complete or absolute dissolving though we had no way
of separating the components out again. [Kant sketches 532
two possible examples of this, one involving heat and the
other magnestism. They are hard to follow, and rest on
now-exploded theories about those two phenomena. Then:]
Our present search, though, is not for •hypotheses to explain
particular phenomena but for •the principle according to
which such hypotheses are all to be judged. Everything
that frees us from the necessity of invoking empty spaces
is an actual gain for natural science. Why? Because empty
spaces leave the imagination far too free to invent fictions
to make up for the lack of real knowledge of Nature. In
the doctrine of Nature, absolute emptiness and absolute
density play about the same role that blind chance and blind
fate play in metaphysics, namely that of a bar to reason’s
dominance—either replacing it with fictions or lulling it to
45  
sleep on the pillow of occult qualities!
The chief problem in natural science is to explain how
there can be an infinite variety of kinds of matter. There
are just two ways in which this can be attempted: {1} the
mechanical way, by combinations of the absolutely full with
the absolutely empty; and in opposition to that there is {2}
a dynamical way in which all the varieties of matter are
explained merely through combinations of the basic forces
of repulsion and attraction. {1} The raw materials of the
first are atoms and the void. An atom is a small portion
of matter that is physically indivisible. A portion of matter
is physically indivisible if its parts cohere with a force that
can’t be overcome by any existing moving force in Nature.
An atom marked off from other atoms by its shape is called
a primary particle. A body (or particle) whose moving force
depends on its shape is called a machine. The mechanical
natural philosophy is the process of explaining the variety
of kinds of matter in terms of the nature and composition of
their smallest parts, considered as machines. {2} And we can
label as ‘the dynamical natural philosophy’ the explanation
of the variety of kinds of matter not in terms of
•particles considered as machines, i.e. as mere implements used by external moving forces,
but rather in terms of
•the moving forces of attraction and repulsion that
are inherent in these particles.
The {1} mechanical kind of explanation is very convenient for
533 mathematics, which is why it has—under the label ‘atomism’ or ‘the corpuscular philosophy’—always maintained its
authority over and influence on the principles of natural
science, with little change from Democritus to Descartes
and even to our own times. Its essentials consist in the
assumption of
•the absolute impenetrability of the basic matter,
•the absolute homogeneity of this matter, with no
differences except in shape, and
•the absolute unconquerability of the cohesion of the
matter in these basic particles.
Those were the materials for generating different kinds of
matter in a manner that ·has two seemingly attractive features; it· •avails itself of a single basic kind of matter, varied
only by the shapes of its portions; and •it explains Nature’s
various actions mechanically, as arising from the shape of
these basic parts considered as machines that only needed
an externally impressed force. But the claim of this system to
be accepted depended, first and foremost, on the supposedly
unavoidable necessity of explaining the different densities
of kinds of matter in terms of empty spaces, which were
assumed to be distributed among the particles and within
each particle. . . . {2} A dynamical mode of explanation is
far better suited to experimental philosophy [here = ‘science’],
because it leads directly to the discovery of •the moving
forces that are inherent in portions of matter and •the laws
of those forces, but doesn’t freely allow the assumptions
of empty intermediate spaces and fundamental particles
with fixed shapes, neither of which can be discovered and
determined by any experiment. To go to work in {2} this way
we don’t have to devise new hypotheses; all we need is to
refute {1}’s postulate that it’s impossible to think of different
kinds of matter in any way except through the intermixture
of portions of matter and empty spaces. And we can refute
it, simply by showing how the different densities of kinds of
matter can be consistently thought of without bringing in
empty spaces. . . . This move rests on the fact that matter
does not fill its space by absolute impenetrability but by
repelling force; this force is a matter of degree, which can be
different in different portions of matter. The attractive force 534
of a portion of matter is proportional to the amountq of matter
46  
in it, and is not correlated with its degree of repelling force;
so the proportions of repelling to attractive force in different
portions of matter can vary greatly. So there is no difficulty in
the thought of a portion of matter that entirely fills its space
without any empty parts and yet with only a tiny amountq of
matter—so little that we can’t detect it experimentally. This
is one way to think about the ether. . . . The only reason
for assuming an ether is to counter the claim that ‘rarefied’
matter can’t be thought of except in terms of empty spaces.
·The outright assertion· that there is ether should not be
made a priori, nor should any ·supposed· law about attractive
or repelling forces. Everything must be concluded from data
of experience—and that includes •the thesis that universal
attraction is the cause of gravity, and •the laws of gravity.
Still less will conclusions regarding chemical affinities be
tested in any way except experimentally. Why? Because it
lies right outside the scope of our reason to come at basic
forces a priori. What natural philosophy [here = ‘science’] does
is to explain the variety of empirically encountered forces in
terms of a smaller number of forces and powers; but these
explanations go only as far as the fundamental forces—our
reason can’t get further down than that. Metaphysical
investigation into the underpinnings of the empirical concept
of matter is useful only for the purpose of leading natural
philosophy as far as possible in the investigation of the
dynamical grounds of explanation, because they provide
our only hope of finding determinate laws and a system of
explanations that hangs together in a rational way.
That is all that metaphysics can ever do for •the construction of the concept of matter, and thus on behalf of •the
application of mathematics to the part of natural science
dealing with •the properties by which a portion of matter fills
a region of space in determinate measure. All metaphysics
can do is to regard •these properties as dynamical and not as
unconditioned basic givens such as a purely mathematical
treatment would postulate.
I end this chapter with some remarks about the familiar
question of the admissibility of empty spaces in the world.
The possibility of such spaces can’t be disputed. All forces
of matter presuppose space; the laws governing the spread
of these forces have the form ‘If a region of space is. . . ,
then. . . ’, so space is necessarily presupposed before all
matter. Thus, attractive force is attributed to matter because
matter occupies a space around itself by attraction, yet 525
without filling the space. So a region of space can be thought
of as empty even when matter is active in it, so long as
the activeness doesn’t involve repelling forces, i.e. doesn’t
involve the matter’s being in the space. But no •experience,
•inference from experience, or •necessary hypothesis for
explaining empty spaces can justify us in assuming that they
are actual. Experience presents us only with comparatively
empty spaces; and these can be perfectly explained in terms
of the strength of the expansive force with which a portion
of matter fills its space—·the whole of its space·—a strength
that can be thought of as lesser and lesser to infinity, through
all possible degrees, without requiring ·absolutely· empty
spaces.
47  
Chapter 3
Metaphysical Foundations of Mechanics
Definition 1
536 Matter is what can be moved, considered as having—just
because it can be moved—a moving force.
Remark
This is the third definition of matter. The merely dynamical
concept ·is different from this because it· applies also to
matter that is motionless. The moving force that was in
question back there concerned merely the filling of a certain
region, and we weren’t permitted to regard the matter that
filled the space as itself moving. So repulsion was a basic
moving force for imparting motion, whereas in mechanics
a force is regarded as actually at work in one portion of
matter imparting motion to another portion. ·Very briefly
and schematically: the movement of portions of matter is
considered as a •potential in dynamics, and as •actual in
mechanics·. Clearly, a portion of matter won’t have
•the power to make other things move by its own
motion
unless it has
•basic moving forces through which it is active in
every place where it exists,
this being an activeness that comes before any proper motion.
·Breaking that point down into its two constituents·: Clearly
a portion of matter moving in a straight line and encountering
another portion won’t make the other move unless both of
them have basic forces [Kant wrote Gesetze = ‘laws’, presumably a
slip] of repulsion; and a portion of matter couldn’t in moving
drag another portion after it unless they both had attractive
forces [Kräfte = ‘forces’]. So all mechanical laws presuppose
537 dynamical ones. . . . You’ll notice that I shan’t say anything
more about the communication of motion by •attraction
(such as might happen if a comet with a stronger attractive
power than the earth came close to the earth and dragged
it out of its orbit). I’ll be talking only about the agency of
•repelling forces—i.e. agency by pressure (as by means of
tensed springs) or by impact. I’ll do this because applying
the laws of repulsion is exactly the same as applying the
laws of attraction except for the difference in direction.
Definition 2
The amount
q of matter there is in a certain space is given
by how many movable ·parts· there are there. When this
matter is thought of as having all its parts in motion at once,
is called the mass; when all the parts of a portion of matter
move in the same direction, exercising their moving force
externally, the portion is said to act in mass. A mass with a
determinate shape is called a body (in the mechanical sense).
Mechanically estimated, •the amount of motion is ·a function
of two variables, namely· •how muchq matter is moved and
•how fast. . . .
Proposition 1
The only way of comparing the amountsq of any two portions
of matter is by comparing their amountsq of motion at a
single speed.
Proof
Matter is infinitely divisible, so the amountq of matter in
a given portion can’t be determined directly by how many
parts it has. How muchq matter there is in one portion of 538
matter can be directly compared with how muchq there is in
another, if the two are of exactly the same kind, because in
that case the amounts
q are proportional to the volumes. But
48  
Proposition 1 concerns quantitative comparisons between
any two portions of matter, including ones of different kinds.
So there is no all-purpose method—direct or indirect— for
comparing any two portions of matter with one another, if
we ignore their motions. If we bring motion into the story we
do get a universally valid procedure for such comparisons—
and it is the only one we can have. It involves measuring
the amounts of matter in terms of the amounts
q of motion.
But this comparison gives us what we want only if the two
portions of matter are going at the same speed. Therefore
etc.
Note
How much
q motion a body has is how muchq matter it has
and how fast
q it is moving. One body has twice the motion
of another body if
•they have the same speed, and one has twice as
much
q matter as the other, or
•they have the same mass and one has twice the speed
of the other.
That is because the determinate concept of a size or amount
is possible only through the construction of the quantum;
and such a construction involves putting together many
items that are equivalent to one another [see ‘wwhat Kant aseems
to have meant’ on page 14]. Thus, the construction of a motion’s
amount
q is the putting together of many equivalent motions.
Now, in the context of phoronomy there is no difference
between
•giving to a movable thing a speed S, and
•giving to each of n equivalent movable things a speed
of S/n.
The first thing we get from this is an apparently phoronomic
concept of the amountq of a motion, as composed of many
motions that are external to one another but constitute a
single united whole. And if we think of each point as getting
its •moving force from •how it is moving, this turns into a mechanical concept of the amountq of the motion. But ·actually
this is a blind alley; we can’t get at a mechanical concept
of amount-of-motion in this way, because· in phoronomy
we can’t represent a motion as composed of many motions
existing externally to one another. Why not? Because in
phoronomy movable items are represented as mere points,
with no moving force, so that the only basis for distinguishing
the amounts
q of motion of two things is in terms of their
·differences of· speed. [In a spectacularly obscure passage,
Kant goes on from there to compare measuring amounts of 539
•motion with measuring amounts of •action, and to criticise
a wrong idea that some theorists have had about the latter.
His purpose in going into all this seems to be to present
some thoughts about differentiating ‘dead forces’ from ‘living
forces’. We hear no more of that distinction in the present
work, and Kant invites us to bypass it when he ends by
saying:] . . . .if indeed the terminology of ‘dead force’ and
‘living force’ deserves to be retained at all.
Remark
I have things to say in explanation of the preceding three
statements—[i.e. Definition 2, Proposition 1, and the following Note]—
and in the interests of concentration I shall condense them
into a single treatment.
Definition 2 says that the quantity [Quantität] of a portion of
matter can only be thought of in terms of how many movable
parts (external to one another) it has. This is a remarkable and fundamental statement of universal mechanics,
·because it supplies an answer to the important question
‘Can we have a concept of the intensive magnitude of an
instance of moving force? The answer is that we cannot·.
Such an intensive magnitude would have to be independent
of •the amount of matter and of •the speed, both of which
49  
are extensive magnitudes; and Definition 2 tells us that
those are the only quantitative notions that are applicable
to a portion of matter. Intensive magnitude would have
a place if matter consisted of monads. ·A monad has (by
definition) no parts; so· any monad—however it was related
to anything else—could be more or less real in some way that
didn’t depend on how many parts-external-to-one-another
540 it had, ·which means that its reality could be an intensive
magnitude·. As for the concept of •mass in Definition 2:
it is usually equated with the concept of •quantity, but
this is wrong. Fluid portions of matter can by their own
motion act in mass [see Definition 2] but they can also act
in flow. In the so-called water-hammer—·which causes a
knocking sound in the pipes when a flow of water is suddenly
blocked·—the water in striking acts in mass, i.e. with all
its parts simultaneously; the same is true when a pot full
of water is weighed on a scale. But when the water of a
millstream acts on the lower paddles of the wheel, it doesn’t
do so in mass, i.e. with all its parts together colliding with
the wheel; rather, the parts act successively. So if in this
case we want to determine how much
q matter is being moved
with a certain speed and exerting moving force, we must first
of all look for the body of water, i.e. find out how muchq
matter can produce the same action when it acts in mass (by
bringing its weight to bear) with a certain speed. That’s why
we usually understand by the word ‘mass’ the amountq of
a solid body (a fluid can be treated as solid on the strength
of the vessel containing it). Finally, there’s something odd
about the Proposition and its appended Note. According to
the Proposition,
•how much
q matter must be estimated by how muchq
motion at a given speed,
whereas according to the Note,
•how much
q motion. . . .must be estimated by how
much
q moved matter.
This seems to revolve in a circle, offering no prospect of a
determinate concept of either of the terms. It really would
be circular if these were definitions of concepts in terms of
one another, but that’s not what is going on. The Proposition
does define a concept, but all the Note does is to explain how
that concept applies to experience. . . .
This should be noted: For any given portion of matter,
the question ‘How much [Quantität] matter is there in this?’
is the question ‘How much [Quantität] substance is there in
this?’ and not ‘How much [Größe] of quality Q is there in
this?’, where Q is some special quality such as the powers
of repulsion or attraction that are cited in dynamics. And
what is meant in this context by ‘the amount [Quantum] of
substance’ is merely ‘how many movable parts’ there are in
the given portion of matter.
[Throughout this paragraph, ‘how many’ translates the German noun
Menge. Of the two other currently available English translations of this
work, one says
(1) ’the mere aggregate of the movable’
while the other says
(2) ‘the mere number of the movable parts’.
Of these, the second is not quite right, but is nearer to right than the
other. As you might guess, Menge has two meanings. (1) It can be a
concrete noun, meaning something like ‘multitude’ or ‘crowd’ or, if you
like, ‘aggregate’. ‘I looked along the street and saw a Menge of angry
people coming towards me’. (2) It also has a sense in which it is an
abstract noun, meaning something like ‘how-many-ness’. Why say it in
that clumsy way, rather than just using ‘number’ as the translator did?
Because Kant sometimes—notably in the Critique of Pure Reason—uses
Menge as his more general how-many concept while reserving Zahl =
‘number’ to mean ‘Menge that is determinate’. He holds that when there
are infinitely many Fs, the Menge of Fs is not determinate, and so there is
no such thing as the Zahl of Fs; the phrase ‘infinite number’ is, he holds,
self-contradictory. In the present work, most occurrences of Menge are
50  
in the context of items of which there are infinitely or endlessly many, so
that Kant couldn’t have used Zahl (which in fact occurs only twice in the
whole work). The more important point, however, is that all through this
work Menge is being used as an abstract ‘how-many’ noun and not as a
concrete noun meaning ‘crowd’ or the like.]
[What follows expands and re-arranges what Kant wrote, in ways that
the usual conventions of ·small dots· can’t easily indicate. The thoughts
expressed here are all present, explicitly or implicitly, in the paragraph
that is being replaced.] This emphasis on how-many-parts is
justified by a deep theoretical point about the line between
substance and quality. The concept of substance is the
concept of the rock-bottom subject, i.e. a subject that isn’t
in its turn a quality of another subject. Now, we want to
get a grip on a notion of how much substance there is in a
given portion of matter; and we can’t get at it through any
such notion as that of how-much-force the portion has or
how-big the portion is, because force and size belong on the
541 quality side of the fundamental substance/quality line. Well,
then, what isn’t on that side of the line? The only candidate
is how-many-ness: ‘How many movable parts of substance S
are there?’ isn’t a question about any of S’s qualities, so the
answer to it doesn’t slide across to the wrong side of the line.
[The remainder of the ‘Remark’ is omitted because the preparer to this
version has been defeated by it. On page 67 the passage is presented in
each of the two currently available English translations of it.]
Proposition 2
First law of mechanics: Through all changes of corporeal
Nature, the over-all amountq of matter remains the same—
neither increased nor lessened.
Proof
(Universal metaphysics contains the proposition that through
all changes of Nature no substance either comes into existence or goes out of existence; all that mechanics is adding
here is an account of what substance in matter is.) In every
portion of matter the movable in space is the ultimate subject
of all qualities that matter has, and •how many movable parts
external to one another a portion of matter has is •how much 542
substance there is to it. Hence the amount of any portion of
material substance is nothing but how many substances it
consists of. So the only way the amountq of matter could be
increased or lessened would be for material substances to
go out of existence or for new ones to come into existence.
But substances never come into or go out of existence in
changes of matter. So the over-all amountq of matter in the
world is neither increased nor lessened in these changes, but
remains always the same.
Remark
The essential thing about substance as it figures in this
proof—only as existing in space and subject to the conditions of space, and hence as having to be an object of the
outer senses—is that the amount of it can’t be increased
or diminished unless ·some· substance comes into or goes
out of existence. Why not? Because if x is something that
can exist only in space, the amount of x that there is has to
consist in ·facts about· the parts that x has external to one
another, and if these are real (i.e. are movable) they must
necessarily be substances. On the other hand, something
regarded as an object of inner sense can as substance
have an amount or magnitude that doesn’t consist of parts
external to one another, so that the parts that it does have
are not substances. When this item comes into or goes out
of existence, that doesn’t involve any substance’s doing so;
so the magnitude of the item can increase or lessen without
detriment to the principle of the permanence of substance.
[On this and the next two pages Kant uses the phrase ‘the permanence
(Beharrlichkeit) of substance’ to mean ‘the fact that no substance comes
51  
into, or goes out of, existence’. On pages 11–12 the cognate adjective,
beharrlich, being used for a quite different purpose, was translated as
‘time-taking’.] How can that happen? Well, I can be more
conscious or less conscious, so my mental representations
can be clearer or less clear, and this gives to my faculty of
consciousness—I call it ‘Self-awareness’—a degree ·of reality·,
and we can even say that the substance of my soul has such
a degree; and none of this in any way requires that any
substance come into existence or go out of existence. This
faculty of Self-awareness can gradually diminish, to the point
where it finally goes right out of existence, so the substance
of the soul can gradually go out of existence. [In this sentence
and the preceding one, Kant doesn’t say that the soul is a substance; he
speaks of the ‘substance of the soul’. He doesn’t explain the ‘substance
of ’ locution (which occurs nowhere else in this work, and nowhere in
the Critique of Pure Reason). It does save him from having contradicted
himself about whether substances can go out of existence.] If a thing
has parts external to one another, the only way it could
go out of existence gradually is by being slowly dismantled,
pulled apart; but the soul can go out of existence gradually
in a different way, through being gradually lessened and
eventually extinguished. [Kant’s next sentence is hard to
follow. In it he sketches, in a condensed form, some doctrine
from the Critique of Pure Reason. He is facing the challenge
‘Don’t we know that the soul is a substance? Isn’t it obvious
that when I say “I see something red” I am attributing the
predicate “sees something red” to the mental thing, the
substance, that I call “I”?’ Kant rejects this, and gestures
towards the Critique’s account of how ‘I’ does work in all
its uses. Fortunately, we don’t really need that account
for present purposes. All that matters here (and even it
doesn’t here matter much) is his negative thesis that ‘I’ or the
German Ich does not serve to pick out an individual thing,
and therefore isn’t the name of a substance. Kant winds this
up by saying that the person who uses ‘I’ isn’t employing
any concept of himself as a substance, and he is clearly
implying that there is no such concept. Then:] In contrast 543
with that, the concept of a portion of matter as substance
is the concept of something that is movable in space. So it’s
not surprising that the permanence of substance can be
proved of matter but not of the soul. This is because from
the concept of matter as what is movable in space it follows
that the quantitative or how-much aspect of matter depends
on there being many •real parts external to one another—and
thus many •substances. Thus, the going out of existence of
a portion of matter ·would involve the going out of existence
of many substances, and that· is impossible according to
the law of permanence. [Kant has Gesetz der Stetigkeit = ‘law of
continuity’ here, an obvious slip.] (The portion of matter could be
diminished by being taken apart, but that isn’t the same
as going out of existence.) The thought ‘I’, on the other
hand, isn’t a concept at all but only an inner perception.
And nothing follows from this thought (except that an object
of inner sense is completely distinct from anything that
is thought of merely as an object of outer sense); so the
permanence of the soul as substance doesn’t follow from it.
Proposition 3
Second law of mechanics: Every change in matter has an
external cause. (Every motionless body remains at rest, and
every moving body continues to move in the same direction
at the same speed, unless an external cause compels it to
change.)
Proof
(Universal metaphysics contains the proposition that every
change has a cause. All we have to do here ·in mechanics· is
to prove with regard to matter that every change in it must
52  
have an external cause.) Because matter is a mere object
of outer sense, the only facts about it are facts about how
portions of matter relate to one another in space; and from
this it follows that the only way there can be any change
in matter is through motion—i.e. through •changes from
motion to rest or vice versa, or •changes in direction and
speed of motion. The principle of metaphysics says that each
such change must have a cause; and this cause can’t be
internal, because matter has no absolutely inner states or
inner causal resources. Hence all change of a portion of
matter is based on an external cause.
Remark
The name ‘law of inertia’ should be given only to •this law
544 of mechanics, and not to •the law that every action has an
equal and opposite reaction. The latter says what matter
does, but the former says only what it doesn’t do, and that
is a better fit for the word ‘inertia’. To say that matter ‘has
inertia’ is just to say that matter in itself is lifeless. For a
substance to have life is for it to be able to get itself, through
its own inner resources, to act—i.e. to change in some way
(for any finite substance) or start or stop moving (for any
material substance). Now, the only inner resource we know
of through which a substance might change its state is
desire, along with its dependents—•feelings of pleasure and
unpleasure, •appetite, and •will—and the only inner activity
that we know of is thought. But none of these causes and
activities have anything to do with the representations of
outer sense, and so they don’t belong to matter as matter.
Therefore all matter as such is lifeless; and that is what
Proposition 3, the one about inertia, says—and it’s all it
says. If we want to explain any change in a material thing in
terms of life, we’ll have to look for this cause in some other
substance that is different from matter although bound up
with it. That’s because in gathering knowledge about Nature
we must •first discover the laws of matter as such, not mixing
them up with any other active causes, and •then connect
these laws with any other causes there may be, in order to
get a clear view of exactly what each law of matter brings
about unaided. The possibility of a natural science proper
rests entirely on the law of inertia (along with the law of
the permanence of substance). Hylozoism [= ‘the thesis that
matter itself is alive’] is the opposite of this, and is therefore
the death of all natural philosophy! Just from the concept
of inertia as •lifelessness we can infer that ‘inertia’ doesn’t
signify a thing’s •positive effort to maintain its state. Only
living things can be called ‘inert’ in this positive sense; it
involves their having a thought of another state that they
don’t want to be in and do their best to avoid.
Proposition 4
Third mechanical law: In all communication of motion, action and reaction are always equal to one another.
Proof
[In a notably obscure explanation—omitted here—of why he had to deal
with this third law, ‘for the sake of completeness’, Kant refers to it as ‘the
law of two-way causal interaction of universal metaphysics’. His word
for ‘two-way causal interaction’ is Gemeinschaft, which is standardly but 545
unhelpfully translated as ‘community’.] Active relations of portions
of matter in space, and changes of these relations, have
to be represented as reciprocal if they are to be ·thought
of as· causes of certain effects. Now, any change of such
relations is motion; so we get the result that whenever one
body causes a change in another body, the other must also
be in motion (so that the interaction can go both ways); so we
can’t allow for any case in which one body A causes motion
in another body B which until that moment was •absolutely
53  
at rest. What we can do is to represent B as being at rest
•relative to the space to which it is referred; B must be
represented as moving with its reference-space towards A,
moving at the same speed in absolute space as A is moving
towards B. For the change of relation (and hence the motion)
is completely reciprocal between both bodies; by as much as
A approaches every part of B, by that much B approaches
every part of A. What we are dealing with here is not the
empirical space surrounding the two bodies but only the line
stretching between them (because our whole topic is just the
effect that the movement of each has on the state of the other,
and for that we can abstract from all relation to empirical
space); and therefore we think about their motion only in
terms of absolute space, in which they share equally in the
motion attributed to A, the one in relative space, because
there’s no basis for attributing more motion to A than to B.
On this footing, the motion of a body A toward an immobile
body B is handled in terms of absolute space, i.e. the motion
in question is treated as a relation of two causes interacting
with one another and not with anything else; and so the
motion which appears to us as only A’s is considered as
something shared between A and B. This can occur only in
the following way. The speed which in the relative space is
attributed only to A is divided between A and B in inverse
proportion to their masses; A’s share is only its speed in
absolute space, whereas B (along with the relative space
in which it is at rest) is assigned its speed in the opposite
direction; and in this way the same appearance—·i.e. the
appearance that A moves towards B, which is motionless·—is
perfectly retained. [We are about to see Kant representing speeds by
lines, in accordance with his statement on page 11 that ‘In phoronomy
we use the word “speed” with a merely spatial meaning—the measure of
how far a thing travels in a given period of time’—which has the result:
the longer the line, the faster the motion.] What happens in the
two-way causal interaction of the bodies is constructed as
follows. 546
Let a body A be moving into a collision with the body B
with a speed = AB with regard to the relative space in
relation to which the body B is at rest. Let the speed AB
be divided into two parts, Ac and Bc, in such a way that
their respective speeds are inversely proportional to their
respective masses. Represent A as moved with the speed Ac
in absolute space, and ·the larger body· B (together with the
relative space) as moving with the ·smaller· speed Bc in the
opposite direction. Thus the two motions are opposite and
equal to one another. [Kant is relying here on the thesis (page 49)
that in mechanics the concept of how much motion is a function of speed
and mass.] ·Because they are equal and opposite, neither is
the winner, and· they destroy one another and both come to
be, relatively to one another, i.e. in absolute space, in a state
of rest. [In a helpful footnote in his translation of this work (Cambridge
University Press 2004), Michael Friedman points out that Kant is here
discussing the collision of perfectly inelastic bodies, i.e. ones that have
no bounce-back from a collision.] So we have B moving with its
relative space in the BA direction, and losing its motion when
it collides with A; but the collision doesn’t automatically
cancel the motion of B’s relative space as well. So we have
two equivalent ways of describing the state of affairs after
the collision:
•The bodies A and B are now at rest in absolute space,
and relative to them the relative space moves in the
direction BA with the speed Bc.
54  
•The bodies A and B move with equal speed Bd = Bc in
the direction AB, i.e. the direction that the impacting
body A had.
Now, according to this,
the amount
q of motion of B in the direction and with
the speed Bc,
which is the same as
the amount
q of motion of B in the direction Bd with
the speed Bd,
is equal to
the amount
q of motion of the body A with the speed
and in the direction Ac.
Consequently, the effect ·of the collision·, i.e. the motion Bd
that B receives by impact in relative space, and hence also
the action of the body A with the speed Ac, is always equal to
the reaction Bc. That is a part of what was to be proved—the
part saying that whenever a moving body causes a change
in the motion of a stationary body, action and reaction are
equal. It’s a thesis in mathematical mechanics that this
same law ·about action and reaction· holds for the impact
of one moving body on another moving body just as well
as it does for the impact of one body on another that is
motiononless. Also, the communicating of motion by impact
differs from the communicating of motion by traction only
in the direction in which the portions of matter oppose one
547 another in their motions. From all of this it follows that
in all communication of motion, action and reaction are
always equal to one another: an impact can communicate
the motion of one body to another only by means of an
equal counter-impact, a pressure only by means of an equal
counter-pressure, and a traction only by an equal countertraction).3
3 In phoronomy a body’s motion was considered merely as the change
in its relation to space, so we could say that ‘the body moves in this
Note 1
From this we can infer a natural law that is of some im- 548
portance for universal mechanics, namely that every body,
however great its mass may be, must be movable by the
impact of any other body, however small its mass or speed
may be. This is because the motion of body A in the direction
AB must encounter an equal motion of B in the opposite
direction BA [this refers to the diagram on page 54]. The two
motions cancel one another in absolute space by impact.
But thereby both bodies receive a speed Bd = Bc in the
direction of the impacting one; consequently, the body B is
direction’ or ‘the body stays still and the space moves in that direction’, i.e. the opposite direction; these two were indistinguishable by
any appearance. The quantity of motion of the space was merely
its speed, so the quantity of motion of the body was nothing but its
speed (which is why we could regard the body as a mere movable
point). But in mechanics we deal with a body x that is moving
relative to another body y and, through that motion, is causally
related to y. Whether by •moving towards y and exercising its force
of impenetrability or by •moving away from y and exercising its force
of attraction, x comes to be in a two-way causal interaction with y.
So here ·in mechanics· there is a difference between ‘x moves this
way’ and ‘x is stationary while the space containing it moves the
opposite way’. That is because we are now working with a different
concept of quantity of motion—it involves not merely a thing’s speed
but also the thing’s quantity of substance, which is relevant to its
role as a moving cause. And we now •have to assume that both
bodies are moved (in phoronomy we had our •choice about that),
and indeed that they are moved with the same quantity of motion in
opposite directions. When one body is not moving in relation to its
space, we have to attribute the required motion to this body together
with its space. For the only way the body x can act on body y other
through x’s s own motion is by repulsive force as it approaches y or
by attractive force as it moves away. Now, given that the two forces
always act with equal strength and in opposite directions, any action
by one of those forces in one body requires a counter-action by the
other; so no body can pass motion on to an absolutely immobile
body; the second body must be moved in the opposite direction . . . .
55  
movable by every force of impact, however small.
Note 2
This is, then, the mechanical law of the equality of action
and reaction. It is based on the fact that motion is never
communicated ·from one body to another· except in a twoway causal interaction between the two. And on the following:
It is trivially obvious that a body A can’t hit a second body
B that is motionless in relation to A; what happens is that A
hits B which is motionless in relation to B’s space. So when
A hits B, it must be that B together with its space is moving
towards A. How fast? Well, the initial speed that we would
attribute to A if we thought of it as moving in absolute space
has to be divided between A and B-with-its-space, ·so that
we get the right account of how long it takes A to reach B
from the given distance away·; and the division must assign
to each body not the same speed but the same amount of
motion, so that the speed of each is inversely proportional to
its mass. [See the discussion of amount-of-motion on page 49.]. . . .
There is also a dynamical law of the equality of the action
and reaction of portions of matter. It doesn’t concern one
portion A’s sharing its motion with another portion B, but
rather A’s giving its entirer motion to B and having motion
produced in itself through B’s resistance. This can be easily
demonstrated in a similar way. For if A attracts B, then A
compels B to approach A, i.e. resists the force with which
B tries to pull away. But there’s no difference between
•B’s pulling away from A and •A’s pulling away from B;
so traction and countertraction are equal to one another.
549 Similarly, if A repels B, then A resists the approach of B; but
B’s approaching A is just the same as A’s approaching B, so
it is just as correct to say that B equally resists the approach
of A; so pressure and counterpressure are always equal.
Remark 1
This then is the construction of the communication of motion.
This construction necessarily carries with it the law of the
equality of action and reaction. Newton didn’t venture to
prove this law a priori, but appealed to experience to prove it.
Others tried to secure this law by introducing into natural
science a special force of ‘inertia’ (Kepler’s name for it); so
basically they were also deriving it—·i.e. the law of action
and reaction·—from experience. Yet others tried to get it
from the mere concept of the communication of motion [see the
note on page 38]. They thought of this as involving a gradual
transfer of body A’s motion into another body B, so that A
loses exactly as much as B gains; ·their view was that· the
transfer stops when A and B are moving at the same speed
in the same direction as that of the latter; and that rules out
any reaction, i.e. any reacting force of B acting back against
A that collides with it.4 ·That is bad enough, but there is
4
·This theory didn’t have to say that the motion-transfer is gradual·.
The equality of A’s action with B’s. . . .is secured just as well if the
transfer of motion is supposed to be instantaneous, with body A coming to rest immediately after the collision; and that’s the form these
theorists’ account would have to take if they were thinking of the two
bodies not as elastic but as absolutely hard. But the law of motion
that that left them with doesn’t square with experience and isn’t even
consistent, so their only way out would be to deny that there are any
absolutely hard bodies (thus making their law contingent, because
dependent on a special quality of colliding bodies). But I can’t see
how the transfer-of-motion theorists could explain what happens
in collisions if the colliding bodies are elastic. It is clear that when
elastic body A collides with immobile elastic body B, it is not the case
that B merely receives motion that A loses; rather, B exercises actual
force in the opposite direction against A, as though it were pushing
against a spring lying between them; and for this it requires just
as much actual motion (but in the opposite direction) as A needs
for its part in this transaction. In my version of this law, on the
other hand, ·no such difficulty arises, because· it doesn’t make the
slightest difference whether the colliding bodies are absolutely hard
56  
550 worse·. They don’t show what their account means, i.e. they
haven’t explained ‘communication of motion’ in a way that
shows that such communication is possible. [In the original,
this ‘Remark’ down to here is a single sentence.] The mere words
‘transfer of motion from one body to another’ don’t explain
anything. If they are understood literally, implying that
motion is poured from one body into another like pouring
water from one glass into another, they conflict with the
principle that qualities don’t wander from one substance
to another [Kant gives this in Latin]. If that literal reading is
rejected, then the theorists I am discussing must face the
problem of how to make this possibility conceivable. . . . The
only way to make sense of A’s motion’s being necessarily
connected with B’s motion is by attributing to both bodies
dynamic forces (e.g. the force of repulsion) that precede all
motion—·i.e. so that the forces explain the motions, not
vice versa·. And then we can prove that the motion of A
towards B is necessarily connected with the approach of B
toward A; and if B is regarded as immobile, then A’s motion
is connected with the motion of B-together-with-its-space
towards A, so that the bodies with their (basic) moving forces
are considered to be moving relatively to one another. We
can fully grasp this course of events a priori: whether or not
the body B is moving in relation to its empirically knowable
space, we have to regard it as moving in relation to the body
A, and indeed moving in the opposite direction. Otherwise,
A’s movement couldn’t bring into action the repelling forces of
itself and of B, in which case portions of matter couldn’t act
mechanically on one another in any way, i.e. there couldn’t
or not. [Kant is referring to his version of the ‘third mechanical
law’—Proposition 4 on page 53. So his topic in this footnote, where
he writes about ‘the law’ that these transfer-of-motion theorists have
to accept, is really their version of, their presentation of, the third
mechanical law.]
be any communication of motion through collisions.
Remark 2
The name ‘force of inertia’ must be dismissed from natural
science (despite the fame of its inventor). This must be done
•because the phrase is inherently self-contradictory; and
because because the ·so-called· ‘law of inertia’ (law of lifelessness!) could easily be confused with the law of reaction;
and above all •because this confusion would support and
encourage the wrong account given by those who don’t have
a proper grasp of the mechanical laws. According to their
account, the reactions of bodies—now described as ·exercises
of· ‘the force of inertia’—would lead to
(i) the lessening or annihilation of all the motion in
the world,
and to
(ii) collisions in which no motion is communicated.
The reason for (i) is this: according to the account that I am
attacking, the moving body A would have to ‘spend’ some of
its motion in overcoming the inertia of the immobile body B,
and that ‘expense’ would be sheer loss. And the reason for
(ii) is this: If B were very massive ·and A much less so·, A
wouldn’t have enough motion both to overcome B’s ’inertia’
and then to make B move; so that this would be a collision
in which no motion was communicated. ·Summing up·: 551
A motion can’t be resisted by anything except an opposite
motion; it can’t be resisted by a body’s immobility! So the
‘inertia’ of matter, i.e. its mere incapacity to get itself moving,
isn’t the cause of any resistance. It could be defined:
‘inertia’ = ‘a unique force to resist a body but not to
move it’
and that would make ‘inertia’, ·despite its definition·, a word
without any meaning. We could put ‘inertia’ to a better use
by designating the three laws of universal mechanics as:
57  
•the law of matter’s subsistence [Proposition 2, page 51],
•the law of matter’s inertia [Proposition 3, page 52], and
•the law of the reaction of portions of matter [Proposition
4, page 53].
These laws, and hence all the propositions of mechanical
science, correspond exactly to the categories of •substance,
•causality, and •two-way interaction. There is no need for
me to discuss this here.
GENERAL REMARK ON MECHANICS
The communication of motion takes place only by means
of moving forces—impenetrability and attraction—that a
portion of matter also has when it is not moving. The action
of a moving force on a body at an instant is the solicitation
of the body. [That’s the first appearance of ‘solicitation’ in this work.
It is or was a technical term in mechanics. You can safely think of it
as meaning ‘instantaneous tug or push’.] The speed of the body
brought about by its solicitation—understood in terms of
how this speed can increase uniformly through time—is the
acceleration-at-a-moment value. (The latter must involve
only an infinitely small speed, because otherwise the body
would attain through the acceleration value an infinite speed
in a given time, which is impossible. . . .) As an example of
the solicitation of matter by expansive force, let us consider
compressed air holding up a weight. In this situation, the
air’s exercise of expansive force must have a finite speed. [In
this paragraph, ‘finite’ always means ‘more than infinitely small’.] Why?
Because expansive force occurs only at the surface, which
means that it is the motion of an infinitely small amount of
matter; and so we have on the air’s side of the transaction
•an infinitely small amount of matter with a finite
speed,
which has to balance, or to equal, what there is on the
weight’s side, namely
•a body of finite mass with an infinitely small speed.
Whereas expansive force operates only at the surface, and is
therefore a force exercised by an infinitely small amount of
matter, attraction is a penetrating force: a body’s attractive
force penetrates the body itself, so that the body’s inner
parts contribute to the attractive force of the body as a whole.
If attraction were not a penetrating force, the equations
implied by the mechanical proposition 4 wouldn’t come out
right. [That somewhat simplifies what Kant wrote.] Cohesion is 552
often thought of as a force operating only at surfaces; but
we now see that if cohesion is to be true attraction and not
merely external compression—i.e. if it’s to be thought of in
terms of the parts of a body pulling together rather than
being pushed together—it can’t be thought of in this way.
An absolutely hard body would be one whose parts attracted one another so strongly that no weight could •separate
or •re-arrange them. This means that the parts of such
a body would have to pull on one another infinitely more
strongly than gravity pulls on them (·because: however
strong the gravitational pull, the part-on-part pull will defeat
it·). But . . . [and then Kant proceeds with a defeatingly
technical reason why this fact, conjoined with some others,
implies that absolute hardness is impossible. He follows
this with what seems to be an entirely different and much
more accessible reason, namely:] An absolutely hard body is
impossible because
in a collision between body x and absolutely hard body
y, x would be moving with a finite speed and y would
react instantaneously with a resistance equal to the
whole of x’s force.
And this is impossible. A portion of matter produces by its
impenetrability or cohesion only an infinitely small instan-
58  
taneous resistance to the force of a body that collides with
it. A consequence of this is the mechanical law of continuity,
namely:
A collision can’t make a body move, or stop moving,
or change speed or direction, instanteously. Any such
change occurs through a time-taking infinite series of
intermediate states whose difference from one another
is smaller than that between the first and last such
states.
[That is what Kant wrote; but the reference to ‘the first and last’ states
doesn’t help to pin down the notion of continuity, and may be a mere slip
on Kant’s part. What he needed, and perhaps what he meant, was this:
‘Given any two members of this series, there is an intermediate state that
is more like each of them than they are like one another.’]
Thus, a moving body x that collides with a portion of matter
y is halted by y’s resistance not •instanteously but through
a continuous slowing down; similarly for the other changes
that a collision can subject a body to—starting to move,
changing speed, changing direction. When the direction of a
body’s motion changes, it goes through all possible directions
intermediate between its first and last ones, which means
that it changes direction by moving in a curved line. This
law ·of continuity· also applies. . . .to changes in a body’s
553 state by means of attraction. This ·mechanical· law of
continuity is based on the law of the inertia of matter. On the
other hand, the metaphysical law of continuity applies quite
generally to all change (internal as well as external), and
its basis is provided by concepts: the concept of change as
a magnitude, and the concept of generation of a magnitude
(which necessarily happens continuously through a period
of time). So this metaphysical law has no place here.
Chapter 4
Metaphysical Foundations of Phenomenology
Definition
Matter is whatever is movable and can be an object of 554
experience.
Remark
Like everything that is represented through the senses, motion is given only as appearance. For the representation of
motion to become experience, there has to be—in addition ·to
(i) what is received through the senses·—also (ii) something
thought by the understanding. As well as (i) being a state of
the perceiving •subject, the representation ·of motion· must
also determine an •object. So something movable becomes
an object of experience when a certain object (here, a material
thing) is thought of as falling under the predicate ‘moves’.
Now, motion is change of relation in space. So there are
always two correlates here, ·namely matter and space, and
we have some options·:
(a) In appearance, we can handle things in terms of the
motion of matter or the motion of space; it doesn’t
matter which we choose, because the two accounts
are equivalent.
(b) In the experience of motion we must think of one of
the two—matter or space—as moving and the other
as staying still.
(c) Reason must necessarily represent both of these correlates as moving at the same time.
All we get in the appearance of motion is the change in
the relation of matter to space; and that doesn’t pick out 555
any of those three options as the right one. But ·we can’t
59  
just leave it at that·: we have to settle the conditions under
which a movable thing can be thought of as moving in this
or that specific way, because without that there can’t be
experience of a moving thing. (The difference ·that I am
invoking here· between •appearance and •experience is not
the same as the difference between •illusion and •truth—·i.e.
the difference between •how things seem and •how they
are·. That’s because •illusion ·or seeming· is nothing like
•appearance: something’s seeming to be the case always
involves judgments about what is objectively the case; such
judgments are always in danger of going wrong by taking
the subjective to be objective, but in appearance there is no
judgment of the understanding. This distinction is significant
not only here but all through philosophy, because there is
always confusion when what is said about ‘appearances’ is
taken to be referring to illusion or seeming.)
Proposition 1
(a) ‘That portion of matter is moving in a straight line in
relation to that empirical space’—as distinct from ‘The space
is moving in the opposite direction in relation to the portion
of matter’—is a merely possible predicate. (b) ‘That portion of
matter is moving in a straight line period’, i.e. its movement
is absolute, not thought of as a changing relation to matter
outside it, is impossible. [Kant is assuming here that if you don’t
relate a moving thing to any body outside it you can’t be relating it to an
empirical space.]
Proof
In the case of a body x moving in a relative space y, these
two:
(1) y is at rest and x is moving this way within it, and
(2) x is at rest and y is moving in that way—the opposite
way—around it
tell the same story about what is objectively happening out
there; they differ only in what they imply about the subject,
·the person whose experience is being reported on·. So there
is no difference between them at the level of experience, only
at the level of appearance. If the spectator puts himself
into the space y, then he says that the body moves; if he
puts himself (at least in thought) into another space z that
encloses y, with x being at rest in relation to z, then he
(the spectator) will say that space y is moving. Therefore,
in experience. . . .there is no difference whatever between 556
(1) and (2). [In a very repetitious passage, Kant belabours
the point that (1) and (2) represent a pair of choices that one
might make, not rival accounts of what is objectively the case.
And yet they do apply conflicting predicates to x—‘moving’
and ‘at rest’—from which Kant concludes:] Something that
is in itself undetermined as regards two mutually opposed
predicates is to that extent merely possible. So the straightline motion of a portion of matter in empirical space—as
against the opposite motion of the space—is in experience a
merely possible predicate. This was (a) the first thing to be
proved.
Next: For any •relation to be an object of experience,
each of the related items must be an object of experience;
this holds also for any •change of relation, including the
special case of the relation-change that is •motion. Now
pure space (in contrast to empirical space), i.e. absolute
space (in contrast to relative space) is not an object of
experience; basically it is nothing. So straight-line motion
without reference to anything empirical, i.e. absolute motion,
is utterly impossible. This was (b) the second thing to be
proved. . . .
Remark
This proposition determines the modality of motion with
60  
respect to phoronomy—namely possibility.
Proposition 2
The circular motion of a portion of matter x, as against the
opposite motion of the space, is an actual predicate of x.
557 On the other hand, the opposite motion of a relative space,
taken as a substitute for the motion of x, is not an actual
motion of x—at most it may seem to be an actual motion of
that body, but this is a mere illusion.
Proof
Circular motion is (like every curved-line motion) a continuous change of •straight-line motion; and since •this motion
is itself a continuous change of relation to external space; so
circular motion is a change of the change of these external
spatial relations, and is therefore a continuous arising of
new motions. Now, according to the law of inertia, a motion
can’t start up without having an external cause. But the
circulating body x at every point of this circle is (also by
the law of inertia) endeavouring to proceed in the straight
line at a tangent to the circle, and this straight-line motion
acts against the external cause ·of x’s circular movement·.
[Re ‘endeavouring’, see the long note on page 19.] Hence every body
in circular motion manifests by its motion a moving force.
Now, the motion of the space, in contrast to the motion of
the body, is merely phoronomic and has no moving force.
Consequently, the judgment that here either the body is
moved or else the space is moved in the opposite direction
is a disjunctive one, by which, if the one member, namely,
the motion of the body, is posited, then the other member,
namely, the motion of the space, is excluded. Therefore, the
circular motion of a body, in contradistinction to the motion
of the space, is an actual motion. Even though according to
the appearance [Erscheinung] •the motion of the space agrees
with •the circular motion of the body, nevertheless in the
complex of all appearances, i.e. of possible experience, the
•former motion conflicts with the •latter; and hence the
former is nothing but mere illusion [Schein].
Remark
This proposition determines the modality of motion with regard to dynamics—namely, actuality. For a motion that can’t
take place without the influence of a continuously acting
external moving force exhibits—directly or indirectly—basic
moving forces of matter, either of repulsion or of attraction.
In connection with this topic, see Newton’s scholium to
the definitions at the start of his Mathematical Principles
of Natural Philosophy. This makes it very clear that
the circular motion of rotating around a common 558
centre,
and therefore also
the rotation of the earth on its axis,
can be known by experience even in empty space; which
means that a motion that is a change of external relations in
space can be empirically given, even though this space itself
is not empirically given and is not an object of experience.
This paradox deserves to be solved.
Proposition 3
In every motion of a body whereby it is moving with regard
to another body, an opposite and equal motion of this other
body is necessary.
Proof
According to the third law of mechanics (Proposition 4 on
page 53), the communication of the motion of the bodies is
possible only through the two-way causal interaction of their
basic moving forces, and this two-way causal interaction is
possible only through mutually opposite and equal motion.
61  
So the motion of both bodies is actual. But the actuality
of this motion doesn’t come from. . . .the influence of external forces, but follows immediately and inevitably from a
concept—the concept of how something that moves relates to
each other thing that can be moved by it. So motion of the
‘other thing’ is necessary.
Remark
This Proposition determines the modality of motion with
regard to mechanics, namely, necessity. It is immediately
obvious that these three propositions determine the motion
of matter with regard to its possibility, actuality, and necessity, and thus hence with regard to all three categories
of modality. [This completes Kant’s attempt to tie his four chapters
severally to his four trios of categories.]
GENERAL REMARK ON PHENOMENOLOGY
So we have here three concepts that have to be employed in
universal natural science, and which therefore have to be
understood in precise detail—though the details are hard to
pin down and hard to understand.
They are these:
(1) the concept of motion in relative (movable) space;
(2) the concept of motion in absolute (immovable) space;
559 (3) the concept of the across-the-board distinction between relative motion and absolute motion.
The concept of absolute space lies at the foundation of all of
these. How do we come by this unusual concept, and why
do we have to use it?
•The concept of absolute space can’t be ·a concept of
the understanding, because absolute space can’t be· an
object of experience—space without matter isn’t an object
of perception. But •it is a necessary concept of reason, and
that gives it the status of an idea, but that is all it is—a mere
idea. [See the note on ‘idea’ on page 9.] ·Here is how it comes into
play·. For there to be even an appearance of motion, there
has to be an empirical representation of the space with which
the moving thing is changing its relation; but that space—the
space that is perceived—must be material and therefore itself
movable. [Kant says that this last ‘therefore’ depends on ‘the concept
of matter in general’. Perhaps he is referring to the equation of ‘material
space’ with ‘relative space’ in the phoronomic Definition of ‘matter’ on
page 7.] Now, we can’t think of this space as moving except by
thinking of it as contained in a more extensive space that is
at rest. But this latter space can be related in just the same
way to a still larger space . . . and so on to infinity, without
ever arriving empirically at an immovable (immaterial) space
with regard to which any portion of matter could be said
to be outright moving or at rest. Rather, we have to keep
changing our concept of these relational set-ups depending
on what we are thinking of as moving relative to what. ·I’ll
say it again·:
The condition for regarding something as at rest, or
as moving, is always its being placed in a relative
space—always, again and again ad infinitum, as we
enlarge our view.
From this we can draw two conclusions: (1) All motion or
rest must be merely relative; neither can be absolute. That is,
matter can be thought of as moving or at rest only in relation
to •matter and never in relation to •mere space without
matter. It follows that absolute motion—·i.e. motion that
doesn’t consist in one portion of matter changing its relation
to another portion·—is simply impossible. (2) For this very
reason, there can’t be, out of all the ever-wider concepts of
motion or rest in relative space, one that is ·so wide as to
be· valid for every appearance. ·To have such an all-purpose
concept·, we have to make room in our minds for the thought
of a space that isn’t nested within any larger space, i.e. an
62  
560 absolute space in which all relative motions are nested. In
such a space everything empirical is movable,. . . .5 but none
can be valid as absolute motion or rest. . . . So absolute space
is necessary not as a concept of an actual object but as an
idea that is to regulate all our thoughts about relative motion.
If we want all the appearances of motion and rest to be held
together by a determinate empirical concept, we must put
them within the framework of the idea of absolute space.
[Actually, Kant writes that these appearances must all auf den absoluten
Raum reducirt werden which literally = ‘be reduced to absolute space’;
but his meaning, in this sentence and the next, seems to be something
about framing or handling-in-terms-of.]
Thus the straight-line motion of a body in relative space
is handled in terms of [reducirt auf ] absolute space (i) when I
think of a body as being at rest and think of the relative space
·that it is in· as moving in the opposite direction—moving in
non-empirical absolute space—·and (ii) when I think of the
body as moving and the relative space as being motionless in
absolute space·. The two ways of representing the situation
are empirically exactly alike. By means of this representation
all possible appearances of rectilinear motions which a body
5 [Kant offers here a longish footnote, to the following effect: Any
empirically knowable fact about something’s moving can be construed either as a body moving in a relative space or a relative
space moving around a body. In the context of phoronomy, these
two are alternatives; we shouldn’t think of them as a disjunction—’P
or Q, one of which must be wrong’—because the difference between
them is a difference of viewpoint, a difference in how the knowing
subject relates to the state of affairs, not in what is objectively the
case. In the context of dynamics, on the other hand, such a pair of
propositions are rivals, which can’t both be true. And in mechanics
there is a different pattern again: When one body is rushing towards
another, we must attribute an equal proportion of the total motion
to each body. Kant is here presenting a trio of ways of understanding a certain thesis of the form ’P or Q’: disjunctively (dynamics),
distributively (mechanics), alternatively (phenomenology).]
might simultaneously have are grounded in the concept of
experience that unites them all, namely the concept of merely
relative motion and rest.
According to Proposition 2 [page 61], circular motion can be
experienced as actual motion, even if no external empirically
given space comes into the story; so it seems to be absolute
motion. ·I’ll say that again, explaining it a little as I go·. A
motion such as (a) the earth’s rotation on its axis relative
to the stars is an appearance that can be matched by (b)
the opposite motion of the space of the stars, and these
two are ·empirically· fully equivalent. But Proposition 2
forbids us ever to postulate (b) intead of (a); so (a) is not to be 561
represented as externally relative—which sounds as though
it is being assumed to be absolute.
But ·that’s a mistake·. What we are dealing with here is
the ·humdrum everyday· diference between what seems to be
the case and what is really the case, not the ·metaphysical·
distinction between relative space and absolute space. Employing the former distinction, we can and do have empirical
evidence that the earth is really spinning and thus that
the stars may be at rest, although the space they move
in can’t be perceived. The earth’s circular motion doesn’t
present us with any appearance of change of place, i.e. any
•phoronomic change in the earth’s relation to the (empirical)
space surrounding it; but it exhibits a continuous •dynamic
change in the relations amongst portions of matter within
the space that it occupies, and this change is provable by
experience. For example, the attraction ·that holds the earth
together· is constantly lessened by an endeavour to escape,
·i.e. by centrifugal force·; we know about this empirically,
and it’s a result of the earth’s rotation, which shows that
the rotation is real and not illusory. [Kant wrote this paragraph
down to here as a single sentence.] Thus, for instance, we can
represent the earth as spinning on its axis in infinite empty
63  
space, and can produce empirical evidence for this motion
even though it doesn’t involve any phoronomic change (i.e.
change in the appearance) in how the earth’s parts relate •to
one another or •to the space surrounding the earth. . . . ·Here
is a description of one course of events that would provide
such evidence·. I let a stone fall down a deep hole running to
the centre of the earth; and I find that although gravity keeps
taking it downwards, its fall continuously diverges from the
vertical direction by tending towards the east; from which I
conclude that the earth is rotated on its axis from evening
to morning. . . . This is good enough evidence of the earth’s
actiually rotating in that way; and we don’t get such evidence
from •the change in the earth’s relation to external space (the
starry heavens). Why not? Because •that change is a mere
appearance, which could come from either of two opposed
causes—from the earth’s spinning on its axis or from the
stars revolving around the earth. . . . But the earth’s rotation,
even though it isn’t a change of relation to empirical space
(·I am now returning to the imagined case of a rotating world
in a space that is otherwise empty·), isn’t a case of absolute
motion. Rather, it is a continuous change in how portions
of matter •relate to to one another, so it really is only a case
of •relative motion, although we represent it to ourselves as
as happening in absolute space. And it’s just because this
movement of the earth is relative that it is true ·or actual·
motion.
[Kant is here recalling us to his point that the line between
(a1) illusory and (a2) real or actual
is not the same as the line between
(b1) how things appear and (b2) how they are in themselves,
or the line between
(c1) relative space and (c2) absolute space.
He is emphasizing the difference by saying that the status of the earth’s
rotation as something (a2) real depends on its belonging to (b1) the realm
of appearance.] ·Our evidence· that this rotation is true ·or
actual· rests upon our encounter with the fact that parts of
the earth outside its axis of rotation tend to fly off, i.e. the
fact that any two parts of the earth that are exact antipodes
of one another tend to move apart. . . . [Kant likens this 562
to a slightly different consideration that Newton used—two
bodies joined by a cord and rotating, pulling on the cord—see
his remark about a ‘paradox’ on page 61.]
As for the third proposition: to show the truth ·or actuality· of the motions of two bodies moving relatively to
one another, showing this without reference to empirical
space, we don’t need to learn from experience about an active
dynamical influence (of gravity or of a taut cord), though we
needed this in the case of the second proposition. Rather,
we can get this result from the mere dynamical possibility
of such an influence, as a property of matter (repulsion or
attraction). That possibility brings with it the result that any
motion by one of the two bodies is matched by an equal and
opposite motion of the other at the same time. indeed such
action and reaction stem from mere concepts of a relative
motion when this motion is regarded as in absolute space,
i.e. according to truth. Therefore, this third proposition is,
like everything adequately provable from mere concepts, a
law of an absolutely necessary countermotion.
So there is no absolute motion even if a body in absolute
space is thought of as moving in relation to another body.
The motions of the two bodies are here not relative to the
space surrounding them but only to the space between them,
which is the sole determinant of their external relation to
one another. . . . So these motions are only relative. Thus,
absolute motion would have to be motion that a body has
without a relation to any other matter, and the only candidate
for this role would be the straight-line motion of the universe,
i.e. of the system of all matter. ·It is easy to see why·: If
outside of a portion of matter x there is any other matter,
64  
even if separated from x by empty space, then x’s motion
would certainly be relative. Thus, if you can show regarding
any law of motion L that
denying L implies that there is a straight-line motion
of the whole universe,
that proves that L is absolutely necessary, because such
563 motion is utterly impossible. There is a law of that kind,
namely the law of the reaction of portions of matter in all twoway causal interactions that depend on motion [see Proposition
4, page 53]. Any divergence from this law would ·consist in a
shove in one direction without an equal shove in the opposite
direction; so it would· create a straight-line movement of the
common centre of gravity of all matter, and hence of the
whole universe. No such result follows from the thesis that
the entire universe rotates on its axis; so there is never any
obstacle to thinking of the universe in this way, though I
can’t see any conceivable use for it.
Corresponding to the ·three· concepts of motion and
moving forces, there are ·three· concepts of empty space.
(1) What passes for ‘empty space’ (or ‘absolute space’) in
the context of phoronomy really shouldn’t be called empty
space. It is only the idea [see the note on ‘idea’ on page 9] of a
space from which I filter out all particular matter that would
make it an object of experience, in order to think of it as the
space within which every material or empirical space can
move; this being something I want so as to think of every
truth of the form ‘x moves’ not as predicating something of
x alone but as relating x to something else. So this ·‘ideal’·
space belongs not to the •existence of things but merely to
the •fixing of concepts; so no empty space ·on this pattern·
exists. (2) in the context of dynamics, empty space is space
that isn’t filled, i.e. space in which things move without being
resisted by other things, i.e. a space in which no repelling
force acts. Such a space might be either •empty space within
the world or •outside of the world (if the world is represented
as limited). An empty space within the world can be further
subdivided into
(a) scattered all through the world, so that a part of the
volume of any body may be empty space; and
(b) occurring between bodies, e.g. as space between the
stars.
This distinction is not theoretically deep, because it doesn’t
mark off different kinds of empty space but only different
•places in the world where empty space might occur. Still,
the distinction is put to use, because the two sides of it are
used for different explanatory purposes. (a) Space within
bodies is used to explain differences in the density of bodies;
and (b) space between bodies is used to explain how motion
is possible. It isn’t necessary to (a) assume empty space for
the first purpose, as I have shown in the General Remark
on Dynamics [see pages 39–41 and 46–47]; but there’s no way of
showing that empty space is impossible because its concept
is self-contradictory. Still, even if it can’t be ruled out on
merely •logical grounds, there might be general •physical
grounds for banishing empty space from the doctrine of
Nature. . . . Suppose that the following turned out to be the
case (there are many reasons for thinking that it is the case):
What holds bodies together is not •true but only
•apparent attraction; what really holds a body together is pressure from the outside, pressure from 564
matter (the ether) that is distributed everywhere in
the universe. What leads this matter to exert this
pressure is gravitation, this being a basic attraction
that all matter exerts.
If this is how things stand, then empty space within portions
of matter would be impossible—not •logically but •dynamically
impossible, and therefore physically impossible. Why? Because in this state of affairs every portion of matter would
65  
expand into the empty spaces assumed to be within it (because there’s nothing here to resist such expansion), so that
those spaces would always be kept filled up. As for (b) an
empty space outside of the world (i.e. outside the totality
of . . . .large heavenly bodies) would be impossible for the
very same reasons. ·In the scenario we are exploring·, these
large bodies are surrounded by ether which, driven by the
attractive force, presses in on the stars and maintains them
in their density. The further any portion of this ether is
from the star-totality that we are calling ‘the world’, the less
dense it is; this lessening of density continues ad infinitum
as the distance grows; but it never gets to the point where
the density is zero and that portion of space is therefore
empty. [Kant does not try to explain why the density of portions of
ether is proportional to their distance from ‘the world’.] Don’t be
surprised that this elimination of empty space is in the
meantime entirely hypothetical; the assertion that there is
empty space doesn’t fare any better! Those who venture
to decide this controversial question dogmatically, whether
for empty space or against it, basically rely on nothing but
metaphysical suppositions, as you’ll have noticed in the
dynamics; and I had at least to show here that the question
can’t be answered by metaphysics. (3) Concerning empty
space in a mechanical sense—i.e. the ·supposed· emptiness
accumulated in the universe to provide the heavenly bodies
with room to move—it is obvious that the possibility or
impossibility of this doesn’t rest on metaphysical grounds
but on Nature’s secrets (so hard to unravel!) concerning how
matter sets limits to its own force of extension. . . .
* * * * *
This brings us to the end of the metaphysical doctrine
of body, and we end with empty and therefore with the
inconceivable! On this topic, the doctrine of body meets the
same fate as every other attempt by •reason to get back to
the principles of the first causes of things. •It fails in these
attempts because it brings to them its own nature, which
is such that the only things •it can grasp are ones that are
specified as satisfying certain conditions, and yet it can never 565
be satisfied with anything conditioned. When it is gripped by
a thirst for knowledge that invites it to reach for the absolute
totality of all conditions, all it can do is to turn back from
objects to itself in order to investigate and determine the
ultimate boundary of its powers, instead of investigating and
determining the ultimate boundary of things