Mr. Eberhard has made the discovery that, as his Philosophisches Magazin 8: 187
(vol. I, p. 289) proclaims, “the Leibnizian philosophy contains just as
much of a critique of reason as the more recent one, whereby it nevertheless introduces a dogmatism grounded in a careful analysis of the
cognitive faculties, therefore containing everything that is true in the
latter, but still more besides in a grounded extension of the domain of
the understanding.” How it came to pass that these things were not long
ago already seen in the great man’s philosophy and in its daughter, the
Wolffian, he does not, to be sure, explain; yet how many discoveries regarded as new are not now seen with complete clarity in the ancients by
skilled interpreters, once they have been shown what they should look
for!
One could let pass the failure of a claim to originality, did not the
older critique contain in its results the exact opposite of the new one;
for in that case, the argumentum ad verecundiam (as Locke called it),1
which Mr. Eberhard, fearing that his own might not suffice, craftily uses
(sometimes, as on p. 298, with distortion of meaning), would be a great
obstacle to the acceptance of the latter. Yet it is a dubious enterprise to
refute propositions of pure reason by means of books (which can themselves have been based on no sources other than those to which we are
just as near as their author). Perspicacious as Mr. Eberhard generally is,
he has perhaps not seen clearly this time. Besides, he sometimes speaks
as if he will not vouch for Leibniz (e.g., p. 381 and p. 393 note).2 It is
therefore best to leave the great man out of the picture and to consider
the propositions which Mr. Eberhard ascribes to his name and uses as
weapons against the Critique, as his own assertions; for otherwise we
would find ourselves in the nasty situation, that in justifiably parrying
the blows which he administers to us in the other’s name, we might hit
a great man, thereby drawing upon ourselves the odium of those who
admire him.
According to the example of the jurists in the conduct of a trial, 8: 188
the first item that we have to consider in this quarrel is the form.
Mr. Eberhard explains his position here as follows (p. 255): “According
to the arrangement of the journal, it is perfectly permissible to break off
or continue our journeys at will, we can proceed forwards and backwards and
turn in all directions.” – Now, one can readily grant that a magazine3
may contain entirely different things in its different sections and divisions (as in this one, a treatise on logical truth is followed immediately
by a contribution to the history of beards, and this by a poem); but Mr.
Eberhard will hardly be able to justify by means of this characteristic
of a magazine (which would then become a junk-closet) that completely
heterogeneous things should be mixed with one another in the same section, or that the hindmost be brought to the fore and the lowest to the
top, especially if, as is here the case, the concern is with the comparison
283
of two philosophical systems; and, in fact, he is far from judging in this
way.
This seemingly artless arrangement of themes is actually very carefully
contrived, in order to entice the reader into accepting in advance, before
the touchstone of truth has been determined and while he therefore still
has none, propositions that require a close examination, and afterwards
to prove the validity of the touchstone, which is only selected subsequently, not, as it should be, on the basis of its own nature, but by means
of those very propositions that it puts to the test (not those that put the
test to it). It is a clever hysteron proteron,4 designed to avoid gracefully the
search for the elements of our a priori cognition and the ground of their
validity with regard to objects prior to all experience, and therefore the
deduction of their objective reality (as lengthy and difficult labors), and,
where possible, to refute the Critique with a stroke of the pen, while at
the same time making room for an unlimited dogmatism of pure reason.
For as everyone knows, the critique of pure understanding begins with
this inquiry, which has as its goal the solution of the general question:
how are synthetic propositions possible a priori? And only after a laborious consideration of all of the conditions requisite for this can it arrive
at the decisive conclusion: that to no concept can its objective reality
be secured, save insofar as it can be presented in a corresponding in-
8: 189 tuition (which for us is always sensory), so that beyond the bounds of
sensibility and thus of possible experience, there can be no cognition
whatever, that is, no concepts of which one is sure that they are not
empty. – The magazine begins with the refutation of this proposition
by means of the demonstration of the opposite: namely, that there is
indeed an extension of cognition beyond objects of the senses, and ends
with the investigation of how this is possible a priori through synthetic
propositions.
So the plot of the first volume of the Eberhardian magazine is really
made up of two acts. In the first the objective reality of our concepts of the
nonsensible is to be established, in the other the problem of how synthetic
propositions are possible a priori is to be solved. For so far as concerns
the principle of sufficient reason, which he expounds on pp. 163–66,
it is there in order to establish the reality of the concept of ground in
this synthetic principle; but by the author’s own account on p. 316, it
also belongs to the number of those synthetic and analytic judgments,
where something is first of all to be decided concerning the possibility
of synthetic principles. All of the remainder, that is mentioned here and
there beforehand, or in between, consists of allusions to future proofs,
appeals to earlier proofs, citations from Leibniz and other assertions, as
well as attacks on expressions, usually with distortion of their sense,
and the like; exactly according to the advice that Quintilian gives to
the orator about his arguments, in order to deceive his audience: Si non
284
possunt valere, quia magna sunt, valebunt quia multa sunt. – Singula levia
sunt et communia, universa tamen nocent; etiamsi non ut fulmine, tamen ut
grandine;5 all of which only deserves to be taken up in a postscript. It is
bad enough to have to deal with an author who knows no order, but it is
even worse to deal with one who affects disorder in order to let shallow
or false propositions slip through unnoticed.
285Section One
Concerning the objective reality of those
concepts to which no corresponding
sensory intuition can be given,
according to Mr. Eberhard
Mr. Eberhard devotes himself (pp. 157–58) to this undertaking with a
8: 190
solemnity appropriate to the importance of the subject: he speaks of his
long, unprejudiced efforts on behalf of a science (metaphysics), which he
regards as a realm from which, if need be, a considerable portion could
be abandoned, and yet an even more considerable area would remain;
he speaks of flowers and fruits promised by the undisputedly fertile fields
of ontology,* and even in regard to the contested fields of cosmology, he
exhorts us not to stop working; for, he says, “We can always continue to
work for its expansion, we can always seek to enrich it with new truths,
without having first to concern ourselves with the transcendental validity of these
truths” (which is here equivalent to the objective reality of its concepts),
and he adds: “In this way have the mathematicians themselves completed
the delineation of entire sciences, without saying a single word about the
reality of their object.” Meanwhile, desiring that the reader should be fully
attentive to this point, he says: “This may be illustrated by a notable
example, by an example that is too pertinent and instructive for me not to
be allowed to cite it here.” Yes, quite instructive; for never has a more ex-
8: 191 cellent example been given as a warning not to appeal to arguments from
sciences that one does not understand, not even on the assurance of other
famous men who merely report on the matter; since it is to be expected
that one will not understand this either. For Mr. Eberhard could not have
more forcefully refuted himself and his announced project than by the
judgment repeated from Borelli 6 concerning the Conica of Apollonius.7
* But these are precisely the fields whose concepts and principles, as claims to a
cognition of things in general, have been challenged, and have been limited to the
much narrower field of objects of possible experience. This endeavor to refuse
in advance to be concerned with the question of the titulum possessionis reveals
right away an artifice to keep the actual point of the dispute out of sight of the
judge.
286
Apollonius first constructs the concept of a cone, that is, he exhibits it
a priori in intuition (this is the first action whereby the geometer verifies
in advance the objective reality of his concept). He cuts it according to a
determinate rule, e.g., parallel to a side of the triangle which intersects
the base of the cone (conus rectus) at right angles through its vertex, and
proves a priori in intuition the attributes of the curved line produced by
this cut on the surface of the cone, and he thus extracts a concept of
the ratio in which its ordinates stand to the parameter, which concept,
namely (in this case), the parabola, is thereby given a priori in intuition;
consequently, its objective reality, that is, the possibility that a thing with
these properties can be given, is proven in no other way than by providing
the corresponding intuition. – Mr. Eberhard wanted to prove that one can
very well extend one’s cognition and enrich it with new truths, without first considering whether one is proceeding with a concept which
is entirely empty and can have no object (an assertion which is in plain
contradiction with common sense), and he turned to the mathematicians for confirmation of his opinion. He could not, however, have hit
upon a more unfortunate source. – But the misfortune stemmed from
the fact that he was not acquainted with Apollonius himself and did not
understand Borelli,8 who is reflecting on the procedure of the ancient
geometers. The latter speaks of the mechanical construction of concepts
of conic sections (with the exception of the circle), and notes that mathematicians teach the properties of the conic sections without mentioning
the mechanical construction; certainly a true, albeit a very insignificant
remark; for instruction to draw a parabola according to the prescription of the theory is addressed to the artist only, not to the geometer.*
Mr. Eberhard could have learned this from the passage from the remark 8: 192
* The following may serve to secure against misuse the expression ‘construction
of concepts’ of which the Critique of Pure Reason speaks several times, and has
thereby first made an accurate distinction between the procedure of reason in
mathematics and in philosophy. In a general sense one may call construction
all exhibition of a concept through the (spontaneous) production of a corresponding intuition. If it occurs through mere imagination in accordance with
an a priori concept, it is called pure construction (such as must underlie all the
demonstrations of the mathematician; hence he can demonstrate by means of a
circle which he draws with his stick in the sand, no matter how irregular it may
turn out to be, the properties of a circle in general, as perfectly as if it had been
etched in copperplate by the greatest artist). If it is carried out on some kind of
material, however, it could be called empirical construction. The first can also be
called schematic, the second technical construction. Now the latter construction,
which is really improperly so-called, (because it belongs not to science but to
art and is done by means of instruments) is either the geometrical, by compass
and ruler, or the mechanical, for which other instruments are necessary, as for
example, the drawing of the other conic sections besides the circle.
287
of Borelli which he himself cites and has even underscored. It says there:
Subjectum enim definitum assumi potest, ut affectiones variae de eo demonstrentur, licet praemissa non sit ars subjectum ipsum efformandum delineandi.9 It
would be highly absurd, however, to construe this as claiming that the
geometer was first expecting proof, from this mechanical construction,
of the possibility of such a line, and hence of the objective reality of his
concept. One could rather address to the modern geometers a reproach
of the following nature: not that they derive the properties of a curved
line from its definition without first being assured of the possibility of its
object (for in doing so they are fully aware at the same time of the pure,
merely schematic construction, and they also carry out the mechanical
construction afterwards if it is necessary), but that they arbitrarily conceive such a line (e.g., the parabola through the formula ax = y2), and
do not, according to the example of the ancient geometers, first bring it
forth as given in the conic section, which would be more in keeping with
the elegance of geometry, for the sake of which we have often been advised not to neglect so completely the synthetic method of the ancients
in favor of the analytic method which is so rich in inventions.
Mr. Eberhard therefore sets to work as follows, not according to the
example of the mathematicians, but, rather, in the manner of that clever
fellow who could weave a rope out of grains of sand.
8: 193 In the first part of his magazine, he had already distinguished the principles of the form of cognition, which are supposed to be the principles of
contradiction and sufficient reason, from those of its matter (according
to him, representation and extension), whose principle he locates in the
simple of which they are composed; and since nobody denies him the
transcendental validity of the principle of contradiction, he now seeks
in the first place to establish that of the principle of sufficient reason, and
therewith the objective reality of the latter concept, and secondly, the
reality of the concept of a simple being, without, as the Critique demands,
requiring them to be validated by a corresponding intuition. For of what
is true, we do not first have to ask if it is possible, and to that extent
logic has the principle ab esse ad posse valet consequentia10 in common with
metaphysics, or rather lends it to the latter. – We shall likewise now
proceed in our examination in accordance with this division.
A. Demonstration of the objective reality of the concept
of sufficient reason according to Mr. Eberhard
It is first of all worthy of note that Mr. Eberhard wishes to have the
principle of sufficient reason listed merely among the formal principles of cognition, though he nevertheless views it (p. 160) as a question occasioned by the Critique: “whether it also has transcendental validity”
(is in general a transcendental principle). Now, either Mr. Eberhard must
288
have no conception whatever of the difference between a logical (formal)
and a transcendental (material) principle of cognition or, as is more likely,
this is one of his artful maneuvers to substitute for the question at issue
another which no one is asking about.
That every proposition must have a reason a is the logical (formal) principle of cognition, which is subordinated to, and not set beside, the
principle of contradiction.* That every thing must have its ground a is the
transcendental (material) principle, which no one has ever proven or will
prove by means of the principle of contradiction (and in general from
mere concepts without relation to sensory intuition). It is clear enough,
and has been stated countless times in the Critique, that a transcendental
principle must determine something a priori in regard to objects and their
possibility; consequently, it does not, like the logical principles (which
abstract completely from everything concerning the possibility of the
object), merely concern itself with the formal conditions of judgment.
Mr. Eberhard, however, wished (p. 163) to gain acceptance for his principle under the formula: all has a reason, and since (as may be seen from
the example he has there given), he desired to smuggle in the actually
material principle of causality by means of the principle of contradiction,
he uses the word ‘all,’ and is careful not to say ‘every thing,’ because it
would then become only too obvious that it is not a formal and logical,
but a material and transcendental principle of cognition, which can al-
8: 194
ready have its place in logic (as can any principle which rests on the
principle of contradiction).
* The Critique has noted the distinction between problematic and assertoric judgments. An assertoric judgment is a proposition. The logicians are by no means
correct in defining a proposition as a judgment expressed in words; for we must
also, in thought, use words in judgments which we do not regard as propositions. In the conditional proposition: if a body is simple, then it is unalterable, there
is a relation of two judgments, neither of which is a proposition; only the consequence of the latter (the consequens) from the former (antecedens) constitutes the
proposition. The judgment: some bodies are simple, may, indeed, be contradictory; it can nevertheless still be affirmed in order to see what follows from it, if
it were to be stated as an assertion, i.e., a proposition. The assertoric judgment:
every body is divisible, says more than the merely problematic (let us suppose that
every body is divisible etc.) and stands under the universal logical principle of
propositions, namely, that each proposition must be grounded (not be a merely
possible judgment), which follows from the principle of contradiction, because
otherwise there would be no proposition.
a The term ‘Grund’ may be rendered by either ‘reason’ or ‘ground,’ depending on whether
it is taken logically to refer to the basis (logical ground) of the truth of a proposition or
metaphysically to refer to the cause (real ground) of a state of affairs. Kant’s point in the
following is that Eberhard systematically conflates these senses in his treatment of the
concept or principle of sufficient reason. – Tr.
289
It is, however, not without mature consideration, and with a purpose
which he would gladly conceal from the reader, that he endeavors to
demonstrate this transcendental principle on the basis of the principle
of contradiction. He wishes to validate this concept of a ground (and
with it, unnoticed, the concept of causality) for all things in general,
8: 195 that is, to prove its objective reality, without restricting it merely to objects of the senses, thereby evading the condition added by the Critique,
namely, the need for an intuition by means of which this reality is first
demonstrable. Now, it is clear that the principle of contradiction is a
principle that is valid for all that we can possibly think, whether or not it
is a sensible object with a possible intuition attached; because it is valid
for thought in general, without regard to any object. Thus, whatever
conflicts with this principle is obviously nothing (not even a thought). If
he therefore wished to establish the objective reality of the concept of
a ground, without letting himself be bound by its restriction to objects
of sensory intuition, he had to make use for that purpose of the principle that is valid for thought as such, the concept of a reason; but also
to present it in such a way that, although it is in fact of merely logical
significance, it should still seem to include under itself the concept of
a real ground (and, consequently, that of causality). He has, however,
accorded to the reader more naive trust than he has a right to assume,
even in those with the most mediocre judgment.
But, as is apt to happen with stratagems, Mr. Eberhard has entangled
himself in his own. Initially, he had hung the whole of metaphysics on
two hinges: the principle of contradiction and that of sufficient reason;
and he stands by this claim of his when he holds, following Leibniz (at
least in the way he interprets him), that for the purpose of metaphysics
the first needs to be supplemented by the second. Now, however, he says
(p. 163): “The universal truth of the principle of sufficient reason can be
demonstrated only from this (the principle of contradiction),” which he
then boldly sets to work doing. So in that case the whole of metaphysics
again hangs upon only one hinge, whereas previously there were supposed
to have been two; for the mere conclusion from a principle, taken in its
entire universality, and without the addition of at least a new condition of
its application, is certainly not a new principle, which would compensate
for the deficiences of the previous one!
However, before Mr. Eberhard presents this demonstration of the
principle of sufficient reason (together with the objective reality of the
concept of a cause, but without requiring anything more than the principle of contradiction), he raises the expectations of the reader by means
of a certain pomp in the division of his work (pp. 161–62), and this by a
further comparison, as unfortunate as the first, of his method with that
of the mathematicians. Euclid himself is supposed to “have among his
8: 196 axioms propositions which certainly are in need of demonstration, but
290
are nevertheless presented without proof.” Now, speaking of the mathematician, he adds: “As soon as you deny him one of his axioms, all of
the theorems which depend upon it fall as well. But this is such a rare
occurrence that he does not believe it necessary to sacrifice the simple
elegance of his exposition and the beautiful proportions of his system. Philosophy must be more obliging.” So there is now a licentia geometrica,
just as there has long been a licentia poetica. If only this obliging philosophy
(in proofs, as is added at once) had also been obliging enough to produce
an example from Euclid, where he presents a proposition which is mathematically demonstrable as an axiom; for of what can be demonstrated
merely philosophically (from concepts), e.g., the whole is greater than its
parts, the proof does not belong to mathematics, if its method is stated
in a fully rigorous way.
Now follows the promised demonstration. It is good that it is not
lengthy; for its cogency is all the more striking. We shall therefore state it
in full: “Either everything has a reason or not everything has a reason. In
the latter case, something could be possible and conceivable, the reason
for which would be nothing. – But if, of two opposite things, one could
be without a sufficient reason, so likewise could the other be without a
sufficient reason. For example, if a mass of air could move eastward and
thus the wind blow towards the east, without the air in the east becoming warmer and more rarified, then this mass of air would equally well
be able to move westward as eastward; the same air would therefore be
able to move at the same time in two opposite directions, east and west,
and consequently, eastward and not eastward, that is to say, it could at
the same time be and not be, which is contradictory and impossible.”
This demonstration, whereby the philosopher should, with respect to
thoroughness, be even more obliging than the mathematician, has all the
attributes that a demonstration must have in order to serve in logic as an
example of how a demonstration should not be conducted. – First of all,
the proposition to be demonstrated is ambiguously expressed, so that one
can make either a logical or a transcendental principle out of it, since the
word ‘all’ can signify either every judgment, which we take as a proposition 8: 197
about something or other, or every thing. If it is taken in the first sense (so
that it would have to read: ‘every proposition has its reason’), it is then not
only universally true, but is even inferred immediately from the principle
of contradiction; however, if by ‘all ’ every thing were to be understood,
then an entirely different mode of demonstration would be required.
Second, the demonstration lacks unity. It actually consists of two
demonstrations. The first is the well-known proof of Baumgarten,11 to
which nobody is likely to appeal any more; except for the missing conclusion (“which is self-contradictory”), which each must add for himself, it is
completed where I have inserted the dash. This is followed immediately
by another demonstration, which by means of the word ‘but’ is presented
291
as a mere step in the chain of reasoning leading to the conclusion of the
first, though if one omits the word ‘but’ it constitutes a self-sufficient
demonstration; since in order to find a contradiction in the proposition
that there is something without a reason more is needed than in the first,
which found it immediately in this proposition itself; and since, in order to conjure up a contradiction, the present demonstration must add
the proposition that the opposite of the thing would also be without a
reason, it is therefore conducted quite differently from the Baumgartian
proof, of which it was still supposed to form a part.
Third, the new direction, which Mr. Eberhard has sought to give to his
demonstration (p. 164), is very unfortunate; for the inference by which
it proceeds has four terms. – Put in syllogistic form, it runs as follows:
A wind that blows east without reason, might just as well (instead of
this) blow west.
Now (as the opponent of the principle of sufficient reason asserts) the
wind blows east without reason.
Consequently, it can simultaneously blow east and west (which is a
contradiction).
It is clear that I am fully justified in inserting the phrase ‘instead of
this’ in the major premise; for without such a restriction in meaning no
one could accept it. If someone wagers a certain sum on a lucky toss and
wins, someone wishing to dissuade him from playing might very well say
that he could just as well have had a miss, and thus lost a good deal; but
only instead of a hit, not hit and miss together on the same toss. Similarly,
8: 198 the artist who has carved a god out of a piece of wood might just as well
(instead of this) have made a bench out of it; but it does not follow from
this that he could have made both from it at the same time.
Fourth, the proposition itself, in the unlimited universality in which
it there stands, is, if it is to be valid of things, obviously false; for according to it there would be absolutely nothing unconditioned; but to
seek to avoid this embarrassing consequence, by saying of the supreme
being that it does, indeed, also have a ground of its existence, but that
this lies within it, leads to a contradiction; for the ground of the existence of a thing, as real ground, must always be distinguished from this
thing and this must then necessarily be thought as dependent upon another. Of a proposition I can very well say that it has the reason (the logical reason) for its truth in itself; since the concept of the subject is something other than that of the predicate, and can contain the reason thereof;
but if I allow no other ground for the existence of a thing to be accepted
save this thing itself, I mean by this that it has no further real ground.
Mr. Eberhard has thus accomplished nothing of what he intended to
achieve in regard to the concept of causality, namely, to establish the validity of this category, and presumably that of the others with it, for things
292
in general, without restricting its use and validity for the cognition of
things to objects of experience, and he has vainly employed the sovereign
principle of contradiction for this purpose. The teaching of the Critique
therefore stands firm: that no category can contain or bring forth the
least cognition, if it cannot be given a corresponding intuition, which
for us human beings is always sensory, so that the use of it in regard to
the theoretical cognition of things can never extend beyond the limits
of all possible experience.
B. Proof of the objective reality of the concept of the
simple with regard to objects of experience
according to Mr. Eberhard
Mr. Eberhard had previously spoken of a concept of the understanding
(that of causality) which can indeed be applied to objects of the senses,
but which also, without being restricted to objects of the senses, may be 8: 199
valid of things in general, and he has thus presumed to have proven the
objective reality of at least one category, namely, causality, independently
of the conditions of intuition. On pp. 169–73 he now goes a step further
and even wishes to secure the objective reality of a concept of that which
admittedly cannot be an object of the senses at all, namely, that of a simple
being; thereby opening the way to his vaunted fertile fields of rational
psychology and theology, from which the Medusa head of the Critique
endeavored to deter him. His proof (pp. 169–70) proceeds as follows:
“Concrete time,* or the time which we sense (it should rather say: in 8: 200
which we sense something) is nothing other than the succession of our
* The expression ‘abstract time,’ (p. 170) in contrast to the here occurring ‘concrete
time’ is entirely incorrect, and should never be accepted, especially when it is
a question of the greatest logical precision, even though this misuse has been
authorized by modern logicians. One does not abstract a concept as a common
mark, rather one abstracts in the use of a concept from the diversity of that
which is contained under it. Chemists are only able to abstract something when
they remove a liquid from other matter in order to isolate it; the philosopher
abstracts from that which he does not wish to take into consideration in a certain
use of the concept. Whoever wishes to formulate rules for education can do so
by basing them either merely on the concept of a child in abstracto or on a child
in civil society (in concreto), without mentioning the difference between the
abstract and the concrete child. The distinction between abstract and concrete
concerns only the use of concepts, not the concepts themselves. The neglect
of this scholastic precision often falsifies the judgment concerning an object.
If I say: abstract time or space have such and such properties, this suggests
that time and space were first given in the objects of the senses, like the red
of a rose or cinnabar, and are only extracted therefrom by a logical operation.
If I say, however, that in time and space considered in abstracto, i.e., prior to
all empirical conditions, such and such properties are to be noted, I at least
293
representations; for even the succession in motion may be reduced to
the succession of representations. Concrete time is therefore something
composite, its simple elements being representations. Since all finite
things are in a continual flux (how does he know a priori that this applies
to all finite things and not merely to appearances?), these elements can
never be sensed, the inner sense can never sense them separately; they
are always sensed together with something that precedes and follows.
Furthermore, since the flux of the alterations of all finite things is a continuous (this word is underlined by him), uninterrupted flux, no sensible
part of time is the smallest or a completely simple part. The simple elements of concrete time therefore lie completely outside the sphere of
sensibility. – But now the understanding raises itself above this sphere
of sensibility by discovering the unimageablea simple, without which the
image of sensibility, even with respect to time, is not possible. It therefore recognizes first of all that something objective pertains to the image
of time, namely these indivisible elementary representations, which together with the subjective grounds that lie in the limits of the finite
mind, give to sensibility the image of concrete time. For because of
these limits such representations cannot be simultaneous, and because
of the very same limits they cannot be distinguished in the image.” On
page 171, he says of space: “The many-sided similarity of the other form
of intuition, space, to that of time saves us from the trouble of repeating in its analysis all that it has in common with the analysis of time, –
the first elements of the composite with which space is simultaneously
present are, no less than the elements of time, simple and beyond the
field of sensibility; they are objects of understanding,b unimageable, they
cannot be intuited under any sensory form; but they are nonetheless true
objects, all of which they have in common with the elements of time.”
Mr. Eberhard has chosen his demonstrations, if not with a particularly
8: 201 happy degree of logical cogency, at least with due deliberation and an
adroitness suitable to his purpose; and although, for easily discernible
leave it open to me to regard this as also knowable independently of experience
(a priori ), which I am not free to do if I regard time as a concept merely abstracted from experience. In the first case, I can judge, or at least endeavor to
judge, by means of a priori principles about pure, in contrast to empirically determined, time and space in that I abstract from everything empirical, whereas
in the second case, I am prevented from doing so if (as is claimed) I have only
abstracted those concepts from experience (as in the above example of the red
color). – Thus, those who with their semblance of knowledge endeavor to avoid
a careful examination must hide behind expressions which will conceal their
subterfuge.
a unbildliche
b Verstandeswesen
294
reasons, he does not actually disclose this purpose, it is nevertheless not
difficult, and for its proper evaluation not irrelevant, to bring the plan of
it to light. He wishes to demonstrate the objective reality of the concept
of a simple being as pure object of understanding, and he seeks it in
the elements of a sensible object, a stratagem which might appear to be
ill-considered and contrary to his purpose. Nevertheless, he had good
reasons for it. If he had wanted to prove generally from mere concepts,
as the proposition is commonly demonstrated, that the ultimate grounds
of the composite must necessarily be sought in the simple, one would
have granted him that, but not without adding that this, indeed, holds
of our Ideas, if we wish to think of things-in-themselves, of which we
cannot obtain the least knowledge; but that it does not hold of objects of
the senses (appearances), which are the only objects we can know; so the
objective reality of the concept is by no means demonstrated. He had
therefore, contrary to his intent, to seek that object of the understanding
in objects of the senses. How was this to be accomplished? By means of
a shift, which he does not let the reader properly note, he had to give
another meaning to the concept of the nonsensible than the one which
not only the Critique, but everyone, is wont to attach to it. At times
it is said to be that in the sensory representation which is no longer
consciously apprehended, but whose existence is still recognized by the
understanding, such as that of the small particles of bodies, or even
of the determinations of our faculty of representation, which cannot
be represented clearly in isolation. At other times, however (especially
when the point is that these small parts are to be thought of, precisely, as
simple), the nonsensible is said to be the unimageable, of which no image
is possible, and which cannot be represented in any sensory form (namely,
in an image) (p. 171). – If ever an author has been justly reproached for
the deliberate falsification of a concept (not confusion, which can also
be inadvertent), it is in this case. The Critique always understands by
the nonsensible only that which cannot at all, not even the least part,
be contained in a sensory intuition, and it is a deliberate deception of
the inexperienced reader to foist upon him in place of that something in
the sensible object, because no image of it (meaning thereby an intuition
containing a manifold in certain relations, and thus a form) can be given. 8: 202
Should this (not very subtle) deception succeed, he believes that the
genuinely simple, which the understanding conceives in things that are
met with only in Idea, will have been shown to the reader (without his
noticing the contradiction) in objects of the senses, and that the objective
reality of the concept will thereby have been exhibited in an intuition.
We now want to examine this demonstration in detail. It is based on
two assertions: first, that concrete time and space consist of simple elements, and second, that these elements are nevertheless nothing sensible,
but rather objects of understanding. These assertions are both equally
295
erroneous, the first because it contradicts mathematics, the second because it contradicts itself.
We can be quite brief with regard to the first of these errors. Although
Mr. Eberhard (despite his frequent allusions to them) seems to have no
special acquaintance with mathematicians, he will surely find intelligible
the demonstration, given by Keil in his Introductio in veram physicam,12
from the mere division of a straight line by infinitely many others, and
would see from this that there can be no simple elements of such a line by
the mere principle of geometry that not more than one straight line can
pass through two given points. This mode of proof can be varied in many
ways, and can also yield a demonstration of the impossibility of supposing simple parts of time, if one bases it on the movement of a point along
a line. – Now one cannot here prevaricate by claiming that concrete
time and space are not subject to that which mathematics demonstrates
of its abstract space (and time) as a being of the imagination.a For not
only in this way would physics, in very many cases (e.g., in the laws of
falling bodies), have to be concerned about lapsing into error, if it follows exactly the apodictic doctrines of geometry, but it can also be just
as apodictically demonstrated that each thing in space, each alteration
in time, as soon as it occupies a portion of space or time, can be divided
into just as many things or alterations as are the space or time which it
occupies. In order to avoid the paradox that is felt in this connection (in
that reason, which ultimately requires the simple as the foundation of
all composites, contradicts what mathematics demonstrates with regard
8: 203 to sensory intuition), one can and must admit that space and time are
merely things of thoughtb and beings of the imagination, which have not
been invented by the latter, but must underlie all of its combinations and
inventions because they are the essential form of our sensibility and the
receptivity of our intuitions, whereby in general objects are given to us,
and whose universal conditions are necessarily at the same time a priori
conditions of the possibility of all objects of the senses, as appearances,
and so must accord with them. The simple in temporal succession, as in
space, is therefore absolutely impossible, and if Leibniz has occasionally
so expressed himself that one might sometimes interpret his doctrine
of simple being, as if he wanted to understand matter as a composite
thereof, it is fairer, so long as it is reconcilable with his express words,
to understand him to mean by the simple not a part of matter, but the
ground of the appearance, transcending everything sensible and completely unknowable by us, which we call matter (which may itself indeed
be a simple being, even if the matter which constitutes the appearance is
a composite), or, if no such reconciliation is possible, then we must reject
a Wesen der Einbildungskraft
b Gedankendinge
296
even Leibniz’s claims. For he is not the first great man, and will also not
be the last, who will have to concede this freedom of inquiry to others.
The second error concerns such an obvious contradiction that
Mr. Eberhard must necessarily have noticed it, but has plastered and
whitewashed it as best he could, in order to make it imperceptible:
namely, that the whole of an empirical intuition lies inside the sphere of
sensibility, but the simple elements of the same intuition lie completely
outside it. That is to say, he does not wish to have the simple subtilized
intoa the ground for the intuitions in space and time (in which case he
would have come too close to the Critique), but rather that it be met with
in the elementary representations of sensory intuition itself (albeit
without clear consciousness); and he insists that the composite of these
elements must be a sensible being,b but its parts objects of understandingc rather than objects of the senses. “The elements of concrete time
(as well as of concrete space) do not lack this intuitive quality,”d he says
(p. 170); nevertheless “they cannot be intuited under any sensory form”
(p. 171).
First of all, what led Mr. Eberhard to such a strange and manifestly 8: 204
absurd confusion? He saw himself that, unless a concept is given a corresponding intuition, its objective reality would be totally unsubstantiated.
But he wished to secure the latter [objective reality] for certain rational
concepts, such as here the concept of a simple being, and yet to do so in
such a way that the latter would not become an object, of which (as the
Critique claims) no further cognition whatsoever is possible; for in that
case that intuition, for whose possibility that super-sensible object was
thought, would have had to count as mere appearance, which he likewise did not want to grant to the Critique; he thus had to compose the
sensory intuition out of parts that are not sensible, which is an obvious
contradiction.*
* It should certainly be noted here that he now does not wish to have sensibility
consist merely in the confusedness of representations, but also in the fact that
an object is given to the senses (p. 299), exactly as if he had thereby achieved
something to his advantage. On p. 170 he had attributed the representation of
time to sensibility, because, due to the limitations of the finite mind, its simple
parts cannot be distinguished (so the representation is therefore confused).
Later on (p. 299), wanting to make this concept somewhat narrower, so that
he may avoid the sound objections to this view, he adds to it precisely that
condition which is the most disadvantageous to him, because he wanted to
demonstrate that simple beings are objects of the understanding, and so brings
a contradiction into his own assertion.
a hinzu vern¨ unftele
b Sinneswesen
c Verstandeswesen
d Anschauende
297
But how does Mr. Eberhard extricate himself from this difficulty?
He does so by means of a mere play with words, which through their
ambiguity, are supposed to delay us for a moment. A nonsensiblea part is
completely outside the sphere of sensibility; but the nonsensible is that
which can never be sensed separately, and this is the simple in things as well
as in our representations. The second word, which is intended to make
objects of the understanding out of the parts of a sensory representation
or its object, is the unimageable simple. He seems to like this expression
best, for he uses it most frequently in the sequel. To be nonsensible and
yet to constitute a part of the sensible, seemed even to him to be too
obviously contradictory to enable him to insinuate the concept of the
nonsensible into sensory intuition.
A nonsensible part here means a part of an empirical intuition of whose
8: 205 representation one is not conscious. Mr. Eberhard will not say this straight
out, for were he to have given the latter explanation of it, he would have
admitted that for him sensibility means nothing more than a state of confused representations in a manifold of intuition, and he wants to avoid
any such rebuke from the Critique. If, on the other hand, the word ‘sensible’ is used in its proper meaning, it is obvious that, if no simple part of
an object of the senses is sensible, then this latter as a whole cannot be
sensed either, and conversely, that if something is an object of the senses
and of sensation, all of its simple parts would have to be so as well, even
though clarity of representation may be lacking in them; but that this
obscurity of the partial representations of a whole, so long as the understanding does but realize that they must nevertheless be contained in this
whole and its intuition, cannot raise them above the sphere of sensibility
and convert them into objects of the understanding. No microscope has
yet been able to detect Newton’s lamellae,13 of which the colored particles of bodies consist, but the understanding recognizes (or assumes)
not only their existence, but also that they really are represented, albeit
without consciousness, in our empirical intuition. It has not, however,
occurred to any of his followers to declare them on that account to be
entirely nonsensible and moreover to be objects of understanding; but
now between such small parts and completely simple parts there is no
difference other than in the degree of diminution. If the whole is to be an
object of the senses, all of its parts would necessarily have to be so as well.
But the fact that there is no image of a simple part, even though it is
itself a part of an image, that is, of a sensory intuition, cannot raise it into
the sphere of the super-sensible. Simple beings raised above the bounds
of the sensible must indeed (as the Critique shows) be thought, and to
their concept no corresponding image, that is, no intuition at all can be
given; but then they cannot also be counted as parts of the sensible. But if
a nicht-empfindbar
298
(contrary to all the demonstrations of mathematics), they are counted as
such, it does not at all follow from the fact that no image corresponds to
them that their representation is something super-sensible; for it is simple sensation, and thus an element of sensibility, and the understanding
has thereby no more raised itself above sensibility, than if it were to have
conceived them as composite. For the latter concept, of which the former
is merely the negation, is just as much a concept of the understanding.
He would only have raised himself above sensibility, if he had completely 8: 206
banished the simple from sensory intuition and its objects, and with the
infinite divisibility of matter (as enjoined by mathematics) opened up for
himself the vista of a microcosm;a but precisely because of the inadequacy of an inner explanatory ground of the sensibly composite (whose
division lacks completeness because of the total lack of the simple), he
could then have inferred such a simple outside the whole field of sensory
intuition, which would therefore be thought not as a part therein, but
as the to us unknown ground for it, present merely in the Idea; though
in doing so, to be sure, the admission, which Mr. Eberhard is so loath
to make, that we cannot have the least cognition of this super-sensible
simple, would then have been unavoidable.
In fact, to avoid acknowledging this, his alleged demonstration is governed by a curious equivocation. The passage where it says “The flux of
the alterations of all finite things is a continuous, uninterrupted flux . . . no
sensible part is the smallest or completely simple,” sounds as if it had
been dictated by the mathematician. But immediately thereafter there
are simple parts in the very same alterations, though they are recognized
only by the understanding, since they are not sensible. But once they are
in these this lex continui of the flux of alterations is false, and they occur
discontinuously,b and the fact that they are not, as Mr. Eberhard falsely
puts it, sensed, that is, consciously perceived, in no way abolishes their specific nature as parts belonging to a merely empirical, sensory intuition.
Does Mr. Eberhard then have a determinate concept of continuity?
In a word: the Critique had asserted that the objective reality of a concept is never established, without giving the intuition corresponding to
it. Mr. Eberhard wanted to demonstrate the opposite, and he subscribes
to something that is notoriously false, namely that the understanding
cognizes the simple in things as objects of intuition in space and time, a
view which we will nevertheless concede to him. But in that case, he has,
in his own way, fulfilled, rather than refuted, the demand of the Critique.
For the latter demanded nothing more than that the objective reality
should be demonstrated in intuition; but by this a corresponding intu- 8: 207
ition is given to the concept, which is precisely what the Critique required
and he wanted to refute.
a eine Welt im Kleinen
b ruckweise [literally, jerkily or by fits and starts]
299
I would not dwell so long on so clear an issue, if it did not furnish
an incontrovertible proof of how completely Mr. Eberhard has failed to
grasp the intent of the Critique in distinguishing between the sensible and
the nonsensible in objects, or, if he prefers, that he has misunderstood it.
C. The method of ascending from the sensible
to the nonsensible according to Mr. Eberhard
The conclusion that Mr. Eberhard draws from the above demonstrations, especially the latter (p. 262), is this: “Thus, the truth that space
and time have both subjective and objective grounds . . . has been proven
fully apodictically. It was demonstrated that their ultimate objective grounds
are things-in-themselves.” Now any reader of the Critique will admit
that these are exactly my own assertions; thus with his apodictic demonstrations (to what extent they are such can be seen from the foregoing
analysis) Mr. Eberhard has asserted nothing against the Critique. But that
these objective grounds, namely, the things-in-themselves, are not to be
sought in space and time, but, rather, in what the Critique calls their extra
or super-sensible substrate (noumenon) – that was the claim of mine, of
which Mr. Eberhard wanted to prove the opposite, although never, not
even here in his conclusion, will he state it in so many words.
Mr. Eberhard says (p. 258, nos. 3 and 4): “Besides the subjective,
space and time also have objective grounds, and these objective grounds
are not appearances, but true, cognizable things” (p. 259); “their ultimate grounds are things-in-themselves,” all of which the Critique likewise literally and repeatedly asserts. How, then, did it come about that
Mr. Eberhard, who otherwise looks keenly enough to his advantage, on
this occasion did not see what tells against him? We are dealing with a
clever man who does not see something because he does not want it to be
seen. He actually did not want the reader to see that his objective grounds,
which are not to be appearances but things-in-themselves, are merely
8: 208 parts (simple) of appearances; for the unsuitability of such a manner of
explanation would then have been noticed immediately. He therefore
makes use of the word ‘grounds,’ because parts, after all, are also grounds
of the possibility of a composite, and there he is at one with the Critique
in speaking of ultimate grounds which are not appearances. But had
he spoken candidly of parts of appearances, which are nevertheless not
themselves appearances, of a sensible, whose parts, however, are nonsensible, the absurdity would have been readily apparent (even if one were to
grant the presupposition of simple parts). But the word ‘ground’ masks
all of this; for the unwary reader, believing himself to understand thereby
something which is entirely different from these intuitions, as does the
Critique, is persuaded that proof has been given of a capacity for cognition
of the super-sensible by the understanding, even in objects of the senses.
300
The most important thing in the evaluation of this deception, is that
the reader keep well in mind what we have said about the Eberhardian
deduction of space and time, and hence also of sensory cognition in
general. According to him, something is sensory cognition and the object thereof appearance, only so long as the representation of the object
contains parts which are not, as he puts it, sensible, that is, perceived in
intuition with consciousness. It immediately ceases to be sensory, and its
object is no longer recognized as appearance, but as thing-in-itself, in a
word, it is henceforth noumenon, as soon as the understanding discerns
and discovers the first grounds of the appearance, which he takes to be
the latter’s own parts. So between a thing as phenomenon and the representation of the noumenon underlying it there is no more difference
than there is between a group of men which I see a long way off and
the same group when I am close enough to count the individuals; except
that he claims that we could never come that close to it, which makes no
difference in the thing, but only in the degree of our perceptual capacity,
which thereby remains of the same kind throughout. If this were really
the distinction which the Critique so elaborately draws in its Aesthetic between the cognition of things as appearances and the conception of them
according to what they are as things-in-themselves, then this distinction
would have been mere child’s play, and even a thorough refutation of it
would deserve no better name. But now the Critique (to cite only one 8: 209
example out of many) shows that in the corporeal world, as the totality
of all objects of outer sense, there are, indeed, everywhere composite
things, but that the simple is not to be found in it at all. At the same
time, however, it demonstrates that if reason thinks a composite of substances as thing-in-itself (without relating it to the special character of
our senses), it must absolutely conceive it as composed of simple substances. In virtue of what is necessarily involved in the intuition of objects
in space, reason cannot and should not conceive any simple that would
be in them, from which it follows that even if our senses were infinitely
sharpened, it would still have to remain completely impossible for them
even to get closer to the simple, still less finally to reach it, since it is not
to be found in such objects at all. So no recourse remains but to admit
that bodies are not things-in-themselves at all, and that their sensory
representation, which we denominate corporeal things, is nothing but
the appearance of something, which as thing-in-itself can alone contain
the simple,* but which for us remains entirely unknowable, because the
* The representation of an object as simple is a merely negative concept, which
reason cannot avoid, because it alone contains the unconditioned for every
composite (as a thing, not as mere form), the possibility of which is always
conditioned. This concept does not, therefore, serve to extend our cognition,
but merely designates a something, so far as it needs to be distinguished from
301
intuition under which it is alone given to us, provides us not with the
properties which pertain to it as it is in itself, but only with the subjective
8: 210 conditions of our sensibility under which alone we can receive an intuitive representation of it. – Thus, according to the Critique, everything in
an appearance is itself still appearance, however far the understanding
may resolve it into its parts and demonstrate the actuality of parts
which are no longer clearly perceptible to the senses; according to
Mr. Eberhard, however, they then immediately cease to be appearances
and are the thing itself.a
Since it might perhaps seem unbelievable to the reader that Mr.
Eberhard should have willfully perpetrated such an obvious misrepresentation of the concept of the sensible given by the Critique which he
was endeavoring to refute, or himself have installed such an insipid and
metaphysically quite pointless concept of the difference between objects
of sense and objects of the understanding as is the mere logical form of
the mode of representation, we shall let him explain for himself what he
means.
After expending (pp. 271–72) much unnecessary labor in proving what
no one ever doubted, and having furthermore marvelled, as was natural,
that critical idealism could have overlooked such a thing, namely that
the objective reality of a concept, which in detail can be demonstrated
only of objects of experience, can nevertheless unquestionably be proved
in general as well, that is, of things as such, and that such a concept is
not without any sort of objective reality (although it is false to conclude
that this reality can thereby also be demonstrated for concepts of things
which cannot be objects of experience), he continues: “I must here employ an example, of whose appropriateness we can only later become
objects of the senses (which all contain a composite). If I now say: that which
grounds the possibility of the composite, and therefore alone can be conceived
as not composite, is the noumenon (for it is not to be found in the sensible), I
am not saying thereby: that an aggregate of so many simple beings, as pure objects of understanding, grounds body as appearance; but rather that nobody can
have the least knowledge of whether the super-sensible which underlies that
appearance as substrate is, as thing-in-itself, either composite or simple, and it
is a completely erroneous view of the theory of sensible objects as mere appearances, which must be underlaid by something nonsensible, if we imagine or try
to get others to imagine, that what is meant thereby is that the super-sensible
substrate of matter will be divided into its monads, just as I divide matter itself;
for then the monas (which is only the Idea of a not-further-conditioned condition of the composite) would be placed in space, whereupon it ceases to be a
noumenon, and again becomes itself composite.
a die Sache selbst
302
persuaded. The senses and imagination of man in his present condition
are incapable of forming an exact image of a chiliagon, that is, an image
whereby it could, for example, be distinguished from a figure with nine
hundred and ninety-nine sides. Nevertheless, as soon as I know that a
figure is a chiliagon, my understanding can attribute various predicates
to it, etc. So how can it be demonstrated that the understanding can
neither affirm nor deny anything at all of a thing-in-itself, on the grounds
that the imagination can form no image of it, or because we do not know
all of the determinations pertaining to its individuality?” Subsequently 8: 211
(pp. 291–92), he explains himself as follows, concerning the distinction
made by the Critique between sensibility in its logical and in its transcendental meaning: “The objects of understanding are unimageable, those
of sensibility, on the other hand, are imageable,” and he now cites from
Leibniz * the example of eternity, of which we can form no image, but
may still frame an intellectual conception.a At the same time, however,
he also cites that of the aforementioned chiliagon, of which he says: “The
senses and the imagination of man in his present condition can form no exact image by which to distinguish it from a polygon with nine hundred
and ninety-nine sides.”
One could not ask for a clearer demonstration than Mr. Eberhard
here gives, I will not say of a deliberate misinterpretation of the Critique,
for it is far from being sufficiently plausible to deceive in that respect,
but of a complete incomprehension of the question at issue. A pentagon, according to him, is still an object of sense, but a chiliagon is
already a mere object of the understanding, something nonsensible (or,
as he terms it, unimageable). I suspect that a nonagon would already
lie more than halfway out from the sensible to the super-sensible; for
if one does not count the sides with one’s fingers, one can hardly determine the number by mere inspection. The question was whether we
can hope to acquire a cognition of that to which no corresponding intuition can be given. This was denied by the Critique in regard to that
which cannot be an object of the senses, because for the objective reality of the concept we always have need of an intuition, but ours, even
* The reader will do well not to ascribe immediately to Leibniz everything that
Mr. Eberhard infers from his teachings. Leibniz wanted to refute the empiricism of Locke. For this purpose examples taken from mathematics were well
suited to prove that such cognitions reach much further than empirically acquired concepts could do, and thereby to defend the a priori origin of the
former against Locke’s attacks. But it could not have occurred to him at all to
affirm that the objects thereby cease to be mere objects of sensory intuition
and presuppose another species of being as their underlying ground.
a Verstandesidee
303
8: 212 that given in mathematics, is only sensory. Mr. Eberhard, by contrast,
responds affirmatively to the question and unhappily cites the mathematician, who always demonstrates everything in intuition, as if the
latter could perfectly well attribute various predicates to the object of
his concept through the understanding, without giving to this concept
an exactly corresponding intuition in the imagination, and could thereby
cognize the object even without that condition. Now when Archimedes
described a polygon of ninety-six sides around a circle, and a similar figure within it, in order to determine that, and by how much, the circle
is smaller than the first and greater than the second, did he or did he
not ground his concept of the above-mentioned regular polygon on an
intuition? He inevitably did so, not in that he actually drew it (which
would be an unnecessary and absurd demand), but rather, in that he
knew the rule for the construction of his concept, and hence that he
could determine its magnitude as closely to that of the object itself as
he wished, and could give it in intuition in accordance with the concept,
and thereby demonstrated the reality of the rule itself, and likewise that
of this concept for the use of the imagination. If he had been asked to
find out how a totality could be composed of monads, then knowing
that he was not required to look for such beings of reasona in space,
he would have acknowledged that nothing whatever can be said about
them because they are super-sensible entities, which can be found only
in thought, but never, as such, in intuition. – Mr. Eberhard, however,
either insofar as they are too small for the degree of sharpness of our
senses or because the number of them in a given intuitive representation is too large for the present degree of our imagination and its power
of comprehension,b would have them be regarded as nonsensible objects,
about which we should be able to know a great deal through the understanding; at which point we shall take leave of him, for such a concept
of the nonsensible has nothing in common with that of the Critique,
and since it already contains a verbal contradiction, will hardly have any
followers.
It can be clearly seen from the above that Mr. Eberhard seeks the
matter for all cognition in the senses, and he is not at fault for doing so.
But he also wishes to employ this matter for the cognition of the supersensible. As a bridge to make that transition, he uses the principle of
sufficient reason, which he not only assumes in its unlimited universality
(where he requires, however, a quite different manner of distinguishing
8: 213 the sensible from the intellectual than he is probably willing to allow),
but also, by his formula, prudently distinguishes from the principle of
a Vernunftwesen
b Fassungsverm¨ ogen
304
causality, because otherwise he would be obstructing his own purposes.*
This bridge is not sufficient, however, for one cannot build on the far
shore with any materials of sensory representation. To be sure, he uses
these materials only because (like all other men) he lacks any others;
but this simple, which earlier on he believes himself to have found as a
part of sensory representation, he washes and cleanses of this stain by
boasting of having demonstrated it into matter, since it would never be
found in the sensory representation through mere perception. But now
once it is in matter as object of the senses, this partial representation
(the simple) is said by him to be real; and despite the demonstration,
there remains in that always the one small difficulty as to how one is to
secure the reality of a concept, which one has demonstrated only of a
sensible object, when it is supposed to signify something that cannot be
an object of the senses at all (not even a homogeneous part of one). For
it is at once uncertain whether, when one takes away from the simple
all the properties whereby it can be a part of matter, there is anything
at all remaining which could be called a possible thing. Consequently,
by means of that demonstration he would have proved the objective
reality of the simple as part of matter, and thus as an object belonging
solely to sensory intuition and an intrinsically possible experience, but by 8: 214
no means for any object, including the super-sensible beyond it, which
was, however, precisely the question at issue.
In all that now follows (pp. 263–306) and is intended to serve as a
confirmation of the above, there is, as one can easily foresee, nothing
else to be found save distortion of the propositions of the Critique, and
more particularly misrepresentation and confusion of logical propositions, which concern merely the form of thinking (without taking any
* The proposition, ‘All things have their ground,’ or in other words, everything exists only as a consequence, that is, depends for its determination upon
something else, holds without exception of all things as appearances in space and
time, but in no way of things-in-themselves, for the sake of which Mr. Eberhard
has actually attributed such generality to the proposition. It would have been
even less suitable to his plans, however, to express it in universal form as the
principle of causality: ‘Everything that exists has a cause,’ that is, exists only
as effect; because his intent was to demonstrate the reality of the concept of a
supreme being, which is not dependent on any further cause. It therefore becomes necessary to hide behind expressions which can be twisted at will; as he
then (p. 259) uses the word ‘ground’ in such a way that one is led to believe that
he has in mind something distinct from sensations, when on this occasion he
merely means the part-sensations,a which, from a logical point of view, we are
equally accustomed to call grounds of the possibility of a whole.
a Theilempfindungen
305
object into consideration) with transcendental propositions (which are
concerned with how the understanding applies this, quite purely and
without needing any source other than itself, to the a priori cognition of
things). To the first belongs, among many other things, the translation
of the inferences of the Critique into syllogistic form. He says (p. 270)
that I would reason as follows: “All representations that are not appearances are devoid of forms of sensory intuition (an improper expression,
which nowhere occurs in the Critique, but may be allowed to stand). –
All representations of things-in-themselves are representations that are
not appearances (this too is formulated contrary to the usage of the
Critique, where it says that they are representations of things that are not
appearances). – Therefore, they are absolutely empty.” Here there are
four terms, and he says that I ought to have concluded: “Therefore, these
representations are devoid of the forms of sensory intuition.”
Now the latter is really the only conclusion that can be drawn from
the Critique, and the preceding one has only been read into it by
Mr. Eberhard. But according to the Critique the following episyllogisms
now follow from it, whereby that conclusion does eventually emerge:
viz., representations that are devoid of the forms of sensory intuition
are devoid of all intuition (for all our intuition is sensory). – Now the
representations of things-in-themselves are devoid of, etc. – Therefore,
they are devoid of all intuition. And finally: representations that are devoid of all intuition (to which, as concepts, no corresponding intuition
can be given) are absolutely empty (without cognition of their object). –
Now representations of things that are not appearances are devoid of all
intuition. – Therefore, they are (as to cognition) absolutely empty.
What is to be doubted here, the understanding or the sincerity of
Mr. Eberhard?
8: 215 Of his complete misunderstanding of the Critique, and of the groundlessness of what he purports to be able to put in its place in behalf of
a better system, only a few examples can here be given; for even the
most resolute comrade of Mr. Eberhard would grow weary of the labor
of bringing the elements of his objections and counter-assertions into a
self-consistent unity.
Having raised the question (p. 275): “Who (what) gives sensibility its matter, namely sensations?” he believes himself to have pronounced against the Critique when he says (p. 276): “We may choose what
we will – we nevertheless arrive at things-in-themselves.” Now that, of
course, is the constant contention of the Critique; save that it posits this
ground of the matter of sensory representations not once again in things,
as objects of the senses, but in something super-sensible, which grounds
the latter, and of which we can have no cognition. It says that the objects as things-in-themselves give the matter to empirical intuitions (they
306
contain the ground by which to determine the faculty of representation
in accordance with its sensibility), but they are not the matter thereof.
Immediately after this it is asked how the understanding works upon
this matter (however it may be given). The Critique demonstrated in
the Transcendental Logic that this occurs through subsumption of the
sensory (pure or empirical) intuitions under the categories which, as
concepts of things in general, must be wholly grounded a priori in the
pure understanding. Mr. Eberhard, on the other hand, lays bare his
own system when he says (pp. 276–79): “We cannot have any general
concepts that we have not derived from the things that we have perceived
through the senses, or from those of which we are conscious in our own
soul,” which separation from the particular he then precisely delineates
in the same paragraph. This is the first act of the understanding. The
second consists (p. 279) in this, that it again puts concepts together out
of this sublimated matter. By means of abstraction, the understanding has
therefore arrived (from sensory representations) at the categories, and
now it ascends from these, and from the essential components of things
to their attributes. Thus he says (p. 278): “So the understanding with
the help of reason therefore obtains new composite concepts, just as it
ascends for its own part, by means of abstraction, to ever more general and 8: 216
simple concepts, up to the concepts of the possible and the grounded,” etc.
This ascent (if that can be called an ascent which is only an abstraction
from the empirical in the use of the understanding in experience, since
that still leaves the intellectual, namely the category, which we ourselves,
in accordance with the nature of our understanding, have installed a
priori beforehand) is only logical, an ascent, that is, to more general rules,
whose use, however, always remains merely within the scope of possible
experience, because these rules are simply abstracted from the use of the
understanding therein, where the categories are given a corresponding
sensory intuition. – For the true real ascent, namely to another species
of being that can in no way be given to the senses, not even to the
most perfect, another mode of intuition would be needed, which we
have named intellectual (because whatever belongs to cognition, and is
not sensible, can have no other name and meaning); but with this we
would not only have no further need for the categories, they would be
of absolutely no use to an understanding of that nature. But who could
provide us with such an intuitive understanding, or can acquaint us with
it, if it somehow lies hidden within us?
Mr. Eberhard, however, can also tell us about that. For according
to pp. 280–81, “there are also intuitions which are not sensory (but also
not intuitions of the understanding) – another intuition than the sensory in space and time.” – “The first elements of concrete time and the
first elements of concrete space are no longer appearances (objects of
307
sensory intuition).” They are therefore the true things, the things-inthemselves. He distinguishes (p. 299) this nonsensory intuition from the
sensory on the grounds that it is that in which something “is represented
indistinctly or confusedly through the senses,” and he wishes (p. 295) to
have the understanding defined as the “faculty of distinct cognition.” –
So the difference between his sensory and nonsensory intuition consists
in the fact that the simple parts in concrete space and time are represented confusedly in sensory and distinctly in nonsensory intuition. In
this way, of course, the demand of the Critique is fulfilled with respect to
the objective reality of the concept of simple beings, as a corresponding
intuition (albeit not a sensory one) is given to it.
8: 217 Now that was an ascent only to fall deeper. For once those simple beings were insinuated into the intuition itself, then their representations
were established as parts contained in the empirical intuition, and with
them too, the intuition remained what it was in regard to the whole,
namely sensory. The consciousness of a representation makes no difference in the specific nature of the latter; for it can be conjoined with
all representations. The consciousness of an empirical intuition is called
perception. So the fact that these alleged simple parts are not perceived
does not make the least difference in their nature as sensory intuitions,
such that, if our senses were sharpened, the imaginative power, to grasp
the manifold of their intuition with consciousness, would at the same
8: 218 time be so much enlarged as to perceive in them something nonsensible,
by virtue of the distinctness* of this representation. – At this point, it may
* For there is also a distinctness in the intuition, and hence also in the representation of the individual, not merely of things in general (p. 295), which may
be called aesthetic and is quite different from logical distinctness through concepts (supposing an Australian aborigine, for example, were to see a house for
the first time, and was near enough to distinguish all its parts, though without
having the least concept of it), though it cannot, of course, be contained in a
logic textbook; and because of this it is also quite impermissible to adopt for
this purpose, as he demands, the definition of the understanding as the faculty of distinct cognition, instead of that of the Critique, where it is said to be
the faculty of cognition through concepts.14 In particular, the latter definition is
alone satisfactory because the understanding is thereby also characterized as a
transcendental faculty of concepts (the categories) which originally spring only
from it alone, whereas the former, by contrast, refers merely to the logical capacity to produce distinctness and universality, even in sensory representations,
merely by clear representation and separation of their marks. It is, however, of
great import to Mr. Eberhard to provide his definitions with ambiguous marks,
so that he can evade the most important critical investigations. This also includes the expression (p. 295 and elsewhere): a cognition of universal things;
a thoroughly reprehensible scholastic expression, which can reawaken the
conflict between nominalists and realists, and which, although found, to be
308
perhaps occur to the reader to ask why, when Mr. Eberhard is elevated
above the sphere of sensibility (p. 169), he still continues to use the expression ‘nonsensible,’ rather than ‘super-sensible.’ Yet this happens with
full forethought. For with the latter it would have been all too apparent
that he could not extract it from sensory intuition, just because it is sensory. ‘Nonsensible,’ however, indicates a mere deficiency (e.g., in the consciousness of something in the representation of an object of the senses),
and the reader will not immediately discern that a representation of real
objects of another kind is to be foisted upon him. It is the same with the
expression ‘universal things’ (instead of ‘universal predicates of things’),
of which we shall speak later, whereby the reader believes that he must
understand a particular species of being, or with the expression ‘nonidentical ’ (instead of ‘synthetic’) judgments. It requires much skill in the choice
of indefinite terms to sell puerilities to the reader as significant things.
If, therefore, Mr. Eberhard has correctly expounded the Leibniz–
Wolff conception of the sensibility of intuition: that it consists merely
in the confusedness of the manifold of the representations therein, but
that they nevertheless still represent things-in-themselves, whose distinct cognition must depend on the understanding (which recognizes the
simple parts in that intuition), then the Critique has not falsely imputed
or ascribed anything to that philosophy, and it only remains to determine
whether it is correct in saying that this standpoint, which the latter has
assumed in order to characterize sensibility (as a special faculty of receptivity), is mistaken.* He confirms the correctness of that meaning of the
conception of sensibility, which was attributed to the Leibnizian philosophy in the Critique, in that he posits (p. 303) the subjective ground of 8: 219
appearances, as confused representations, in the incapacity to distinguish
sure, in many metaphysical compendia, still belongs merely to logic and certainly not to transcendental philosophy, since it does not designate any difference in the nature of things, but only in the use of concepts, whether they are
applied universally or to particulars. Nevertheless, this expression, as well as
that of the unimageable, serves to suggest to the reader for a moment that a
special class of objects, e.g., the simple elements, might be intended thereby.
* Mr. Eberhard huffs and puffs in a comical fashion (p. 298) over the audacity
of such a rebuke (in addition to incorrectly rewording it). If it ever occurred
to anyone to rebuke Cicero because he did not write good Latin, then some
Scioppius15 (a grammarian reputed for his zeal) would put him pretty firmly,
though properly, in his place; for what constitutes good Latin we can learn only
from Cicero (and his contemporaries). But if anyone believed himself to have
found an error in Plato’s or Leibniz’s philosophy, indignation that there should
even be something to criticize in Leibniz would be ridiculous. For what is
philosophically correct neither can nor should be learned from Leibniz; rather the
touchstone, which lies equally to hand for one man as for another, is common
human reason, and there are no classical authors in philosophy.
309
all the marks (partial representations of sensory intuition), and when
rebuking the Critique for not having conceded this (p. 377), he says that
it resides in the limitations of the subject. That besides these subjective grounds of the logical form of intuition, the appearances also have
objective grounds is claimed by the Critique itself, and in this it does not
contradict Leibniz. But that if these objective grounds (the simple elements) lie as parts in the appearances themselves and owing merely to
their confusedness cannot be perceived as such, but only demonstrated
into them, they ought to be called sensory and yet not merely sensory,
but also, for the latter reason, intellectual intuitions as well, is an obvious
contradiction, and Leibniz’s conception of sensibility and appearances
cannot be so interpreted, and either Mr. Eberhard has given an utterly
erroneous account of that view, or it must be rejected without hesitation.
One of the two: either the intuition is entirely intellectual with regard
to the object, that is, we intuit things as they are in-themselves, and then
sensibility consists merely in the confusedness that is inseparable from
such a multifaceted intuition; or it is not intellectual, and we understand
by it only the mode in which we are affected by an object, which in-itself
is entirely unknown to us; and then sensibility is so far from consisting
in confusedness that, on the contrary, its intuition might even have the
highest degree of distinctness, and so far as there are simple parts in
it, its clear distinction could extend to these as well, though it would
still not in the least contain anything more than mere appearance. Both
cannot be thought together in one and the same conception of sensibility. Consequently, sensibility, as Mr. Eberhard attributes the concept
of it to Leibniz, differs from intellectual cognitiona either merely in its
logical form (confusedness), while as to its content it contains pure intellectual representations of things-in-themselves, or it differs from the
latter transcendentally as well, that is, in origin and content, in that it
contains nothing at all of the nature of the object in-itself, but merely the
8: 220 mode in which the subject is affected, however distinct it might otherwise
choose to be. In the latter case we have the contention of the Critique, to
which one cannot oppose the first opinion without positing sensibility
merely in the confusedness of the representation that the given intuition
contains.
For a statement of the infinite difference between the theory of sensibility as a special kind of intuition, which has its form determinable
a priori by universal principles, and that which takes this intuition to
be merely empirical apprehension of things-in-themselves, which (as
sensory intuition) differs from an intellectual intuition only by the indistinctness of the representation, one can do no better than Mr. Eberhard
a Verstandeserkenntniss
310
does it, against his will. From the incapacity, the weakness, and the limits of
the faculty of representation (the very terms employed by Mr. Eberhard
himself ) one can derive no extensions of cognition, no positive determinations of objects. The given principle must itself be something positive,
which forms the substrate for such propositions, albeit no more than
subjectively, and with validity for objects only insofar as they are taken
merely as appearances. If we grant to Mr. Eberhard his simple parts of
the objects of sensory intuition, and allow that he explains their combination to the best of his ability by his principle of sufficient reason,
how and through what arguments will he derive from his conceptions
of monads and their connection by forces the representation of space:
that as a whole it has three dimensions, and likewise that, of its triple
boundaries, two are themselves still spaces, while the third, namely the
point, is the boundary of all boundaries? Or, with regard to the objects
of inner sense, how will he tease out their underlying conditions, time,
as a magnitude, but of only one dimension, and (as space is also) a continuous magnitude, from simple parts, which in his opinion are perceived
by sense, though not separately, yet are apprehended in thought by the
understanding? And how will he derive from limits, indistinctness, and
therefore from mere deficiencies, such a positive cognition, which contains the conditions of those sciences (geometry and universal physics),
which extend themselves a priori the most of all? He must take all these
properties as false and merely tacked on (since they directly contradict 8: 221
those simple parts that he accepts), or he must seek their objective reality not in things-in-themselves, but in things as appearances, that is,
by seeking the form of their representation (as objects of sensory intuition) in the subject and in its receptive quality of being susceptible to
an immediate representation of given objects, which form now makes
conceivable a priori (even before the objects are given) the possibility of
a manifold cognition of the conditions under which alone objects can
appear to the senses. Now compare this with what Mr. Eberhard says
(p. 377): “What the subjective ground of appearances may be, Mr. K.
has not determined. – It is the limits of the subject” (that is now his
determination). Read and judge.
Mr. Eberhard is (p. 391) uncertain whether I “understand by the
form of sensory intuition the limits of the cognitive power, by which
the manifold becomes the image of time and space, or these images in
general themselves.” – “He who conceives them as themselves original,
not implanted in their grounds, conceives a qualitas occulta. If, however, he
accepts one of the two preceding explanations, then his theory is either
wholly or partially contained in the Leibnizian theory.” He demands
(p. 378) instruction as to this form of appearance; “whether it be gentle,”
he says, “or harsh.” It has pleased him in this section to adopt mainly
311
the latter tone. I shall adhere to the former, as is proper for one with
superior reasons on his side.
The Critique admits absolutely no implanteda or innateb representations. One and all, whether they belong to intuition or to concepts of
the understanding, it considers them as acquired. But there is also an
original acquisition (as the teachers of natural right call it), and thus of
that which previously did not yet exist at all, and so did not belong to
anything prior to this act. According to the Critique, these are, in the first
place, the form of things in space and time, second, the synthetic unity of
the manifold in concepts; for neither of these does our cognitive faculty
get from objects as given therein in-themselves, rather it brings them
about, a priori, out of itself. There must indeed be a ground for it in the
subject, however, which makes it possible that these representations can
arise in this and no other manner, and be related to objects which are not
yet given, and this ground at least is innate. (Since Mr. Eberhard himself
8: 222 notes that in order to be entitled to the use of the term ‘implanted,’ the
existence of God would have to be presupposed as proven, why does he
then use it rather than the old term ‘innate’ in a critique which deals with
the first foundations of all cognition?) Mr. Eberhard says (p. 390): “the
grounds of the general, still undetermined images of space and time, and
with them the soul is created,” but on the following page he is again
doubtful whether by the form of intuition (it should be: the ground of
all forms of intuition) I mean the limits of the cognitive power or those
images themselves. How he has been able to conjecture the former, even
in a doubtful manner, is beyond comprehension, since he must be aware
that his aim was to vindicate that method of explaining sensibility in opposition to the Critique; the second option, however, namely that he is
doubtful whether I do not mean the indeterminate images of space and
time themselves, may be explained but not excused. For where have I
ever called the intuitions of space and time, in which images are first
of all possible, themselves images16 (which always presuppose a concept
of which they are the presentation, e.g., the indeterminate image for the
concept of a triangle, wherein neither the ratios of the sides nor those
of the angles are given)? He has become so inured to the deceptive ritual of using the term ‘image’ instead of ‘sensible’ that it accompanies him
everywhere. The ground of the possibility of sensory intuition is neither of the two, neither limit of the cognitive faculty nor image; it is the
mere receptivity peculiar to the mind, when it is affected by something
(in sensation), to receive a representation in accordance with its subjective constitution. Only this first formal ground, e.g., of the possibility of
an intuition of space, is innate, not the spatial representation itself. For
a anerschaffene
b angeborne
312
impressions would always be required in order to determine the cognitive faculty to the representation of an object (which is always a specific
act) in the first place. Thus arises the formal intuition called space,17 as
an originally acquired representation (the form of outer objects in general), the ground of which (as mere receptivity) is nevertheless innate,
and whose acquisition long precedes the determinate concepts of things
that are in accordance with this form; the acquisition of the latter is an
acquisitio derivativa, in that it already presupposes universal transcenden- 8: 223
tal concepts of the understanding, which are likewise acquired and not
innate,* though their acquisitio, like that of space, is no less originaria and
presupposes nothing innate save the subjective conditions of the spontaneity of thought (in conformity with the unity of apperception). No
one can be in doubt as to this meaning of the ground of the possibility of
a pure sensory intuition, save someone who may be leafing through the
Critique with the help of a dictionary, but has not thought it through.
How littleMr. Eberhard understands the Critique in its clearest propositions, or even how he deliberately misunderstands it, may be illustrated
by the following.
It was said in the Critique that the mere category of substance (like
any other) contains absolutely nothing more than the logical function,
in regard to which an object is thought as determined, and that by this
alone no cognition whatsoever of the object is produced, not even by
the least (synthetic) predicate, save insofar as we provide it with an underlying sensory intuition; from which it was then justly inferred that, since
we cannot judge of things at all without categories, absolutely no cognition of the super-sensible (always taken here in the theoretical sense) is
possible. Mr. Eberhard purports (pp. 384–5) to be able to provide this
cognition of the pure category of substance, even without the help of
sensory intuition: “It is the force which engenders the accidents.” But
now force itself is again nothing other than a category (or the predicable thereof ), namely that of causality, of which I have likewise declared
that without an underlying sensory intuition its objective validity can
no more be demonstrated than that of the concept of a substance. Now
he does in fact base this demonstration (p. 385) on the presentation of
accidents, and of force too as their ground, in sensory (inner) intuition.
For he actually relates the concept of cause to a series of states of the
mind in time, of successive representations or degrees thereof, whose
ground is contained “in the thing, fully determined by all its present,
past and future alterations,” “and hence,” he says, “this thing is a force;
hence it is a substance.” But the Critique itself requires no more than 8: 224
* In what sense Leibniz takes the word ‘innate,’ when he uses it of certain elements of knowledge will thereby be assessable. An article by Hissmann in the
Teutsche Merkur (October, 1777) can facilitate this assessment.18
313
the presentation in inner sensory intuition of the concept of force (which,
we note in passing, is entirely different from that to which he wanted to
secure reality, namely substance,)* and the objective reality of a substance
as sensible being is thereby secured. The issue, however, was whether
such reality could be demonstrated of the concept of force as a pure category, i.e., even apart from its application to objects of sensory intuition,
and hence as valid also of super-sensible objects, that is, mere objects of
understanding; for then all consciousness that rests on temporal conditions, and hence too every sequence of past, present, and future, together
with the whole law of the continuity of altered states of the mind would
have to go, and thus nothing would remain by which the accidents could
be given and which could serve as evidence for the concept of force. So
if, as is required, Mr. Eberhard were to remove the concept of man (in
which the concept of a body is already contained), as well as that of representations whose existence is determinable in time, and thus everything
that contains conditions of outer as well as inner intuition (for that he
must do if he wants to secure the reality of the concepts of substance
and cause as pure categories, i.e., as concepts which can serve, if need be,
8: 225 for cognition of the super-sensible), then he is left with nothing else of
the concept of substance but the notion of a something whose existence
must be thought only as that of a subject, and not as a mere predicate
of something else; of the concept of cause, however, he is left only with
the concept of a relation of something to something else in existence,
whereby if I posit the first, the other is also determined and necessarily posited. Now from these two concepts he can extract absolutely no
cognition of the thing so constituted, not even whether such a constitution is possible, i.e., whether there can be anything in which it is found.
The question ought not to be raised at present, whether, in relation to
practical principles a priori, the categories of substance and cause would
* The proposition: ‘the thing (the substance) is a force,’ instead of the perfectly
natural ‘substance has a force,’ is in conflict with all ontological concepts and, in
its consequences, very prejudicial to metaphysics. For the concept of substance,
that is, of inherence in a subject, is thereby basically entirely lost, and instead
of it that of dependence on a cause is posited; just as Spinoza wanted to have
it, since he affirmed the universal dependence of all things in the world on an
original being, as their common cause, while making this universal active force
itself into a substance, and in so doing converted that dependence of theirs into
inherence in the latter. In addition to its relation as subject to accidents (and
their inherence), a substance certainly also has the relation to them of cause to
effects; but the former is not identical with the latter. Force is not that which
contains the ground of the existence of accidents (for substance contains that);
it is rather the concept of the mere relation of substance to the latter, insofar as
it contains their ground, and this relation is completely different from that of
inherence.
314
not obtain objective reality in regard to the pure practical determination
of reason, if the concept of a thing (as noumenon) underlies them. For
the possibility of a thing that can exist merely as subject and never in
turn as predicate of another thing, or of the property in regard to the
existence of another of having the relation of ground but not, conversely,
that of consequent to the same, must, for the purpose of a theoretical
cognition, certainly be made evident by an intuition corresponding to
these concepts, because without this no objective reality is attached to
them, and thus no cognition of such an object would be attained; but
if those concepts should yield, not constitutive, but merely regulative
principles of the use of reason (as is always the case with the Idea of a
noumenon), they can also, as merely logical functions for the concepts
of things whose possibility is unprovable, have a use for reason that is indispensable to it from a practical viewpoint, because they would then be
valid, not as objective grounds of the possibility of noumena, but as subjective principles (of the theoretical or practical use of reason) in regard
to phenomena. – But here, as has been said, we are still talking merely
of the constitutive principles of the cognition of things, and whether
it be possible to acquire cognition of any object by merely speaking of
it through categories, without vindicating the latter through intuition
(which for us is always sensory), as Mr. Eberhard believes, though for
all his boasts as to the fecundity of the arid ontological wasteland, is not
able to effect.
315Section Two
The solution of the problem, How are
synthetic judgments possible a priori?
according to Mr. Eberhard
8: 226 This problem, considered in its generality, is the stumbling block on
which all metaphysical dogmatists must inevitably founder, and which
they circumvent as much as possible; so that I have yet to find a single
opponent of the Critique who has endeavored to provide a solution to this
problem that would be valid for all cases. Armed with his principles of
contradiction and sufficient reason (which he nevertheless only presents
as an analytic principle), Mr. Eberhard ventures on this task; with what
success we shall soon see.
Mr. Eberhard has, it would seem, no distinct concept of what the
Critique terms dogmatism. Thus, he speaks (p. 262) of apodictic demonstrations, which he claims to have furnished, and adds; “If he is a dogmatist who accepts things-in-themselves with certainty, then, no matter
what the cost, we must submit ourselves to the indignity of being called
dogmatists,” and then he says (p. 289), “that the Leibnizian philosophy
contains just as much of a critique of reason as the Kantian; for it grounds
its dogmatism on a precise analysis of the cognitive faculties, what is possible for each one.” Now if it really does this, then it does not contain a
dogmatism in the sense in which our Critique always uses this term.
By dogmatism in metaphysics the Critique understands this: the general
trust in its principles, without a previous critique of the faculty of reason
itself, merely because of its success; by skepticism, however, the general
mistrust in pure reason, without a previous critique, merely because of
the failure of its assertions.* The criticism of the procedure concerning
* Success in the use of principles a priori lies in their constant confirmation in
application to experience; for then one almost concedes to the dogmatist his
demonstration a priori. But failure in their use, which gives rise to skepticism,
occurs solely in cases where demonstrations a priori can alone be required,
because experience can neither affirm nor deny anything regarding them, and
consists in the fact that demonstrations a priori of equal strength, which establish precisely the opposite, are contained in the common human reason.
The former are also mere principles of the possibility of experience and are
316
everything pertaining to metaphysics (the doubt of deferment) is, on the 8: 227
other hand, the maxim of a general mistrust of all its synthetic propositions, until a universal ground of their possibility has been discerned in
the essential conditions of our cognitive faculty.
One does not therefore escape from the justified reproach of dogmatism by appealing, as on p. 262, to so-called apodictic demonstrations
of one’s metaphysical assertions; for even when no obvious error is to
be found therein (which is certainly not the case above), they are so
commonly a failure, and demonstrations of the opposite so often oppose
them with no less clarity, that the skeptic, though he should have nothing
at all to bring against the argument, is still fully justified in placing his
non liquet a against it. Only if the demonstration is conducted by a route
whereon a mature critique has safely pointed in advance to the possibility
of cognition a priori and its universal conditions, can the metaphysician
clear himself of the charge of dogmatism, which, failing that, is still always blind in all demonstrations, and the critique’s canon for this kind
of assessment is contained in the general solution of the problem: how
is a synthetic cognition possible a priori? If this problem has not previously
been solved, then all metaphysicians until now have not been free of the
charge of blind dogmatism or skepticism, no matter how great a name 8: 228
they may justly possess for their achievements elsewhere.
Mr. Eberhard would have it otherwise. He proceeds as if such a cautionary call, which is warranted by so many examples in the Transcendental
Dialectic, were not addressed to the dogmatist at all, and long before any
critique of our capacity to judge synthetically a priori, he takes for granted
a synthetic proposition that has long been in much dispute, namely that
time and space and the things in them consist of simple elements, without undertaking even the slightest prior critical investigation as to the
very possibility of such a determination of the sensible by Ideas of the
contained in the Analytic. But since, if the Critique has not previously secured
them as such, they can easily be taken for principles that apply more widely
than merely to objects of experience, a dogmatism arises in regard to the supersensible. The latter refer to objects, not like the former through concepts of
the understanding, but rather through Ideas, which can never be given in experience. Now, since in that case the demonstrations, for which the principles
have been thought merely for objects of experience, would necessarily have
to contradict each other, it follows that if one ignores the Critique, which can
alone determine the boundary line, not only must a skepticism arise in regard
to all that is thought through mere Ideas of reason, but ultimately a suspicion
against all knowledge a priori, which then leads in the end to the doctrine of
universal doubt concerning metaphysics.
a An expression from Roman law, used by a jury when it declines to pronounce a verdict
of either guilt or innocence.
317
super-sensible, which should nonetheless have been forced on him by
the contradiction of this proposition with mathematics, and gives, in his
own procedure, the best example of what the Critique calls dogmatism,
which must forever remain banished from all transcendental philosophy,
and the meaning of which will now, I hope, be clearer to him from his
own example.
Now before proceeding to the solution of this principal problem,
it is of course absolutely necessary to have a distinct and determinate
concept, first, of what the Critique understands in general by synthetic
as distinguished from analytic judgments, and second, of what it means
by characterizing such judgments as judgments a priori, as distinct from
empirical. – The first point has been stated by the Critique as clearly
and repeatedly as can be required. They are judgments through whose
predicate I attribute more to the subject of the judgment than I think
in that concept of which I assert the predicate; the latter therefore extends my cognition beyond what that concept contained; this does not
occur through analytic judgments, which do nothing more than represent clearly and assert as belonging to it, what was already really thought
and contained in the given concept. – The second point, namely, what
is a judgment a priori as distinct from an empirical one, here causes no
difficulty; for it is a distinction long known and named in logic, and does
not like the first at least (as Mr. Eberhard would have it) appear under a
new name. Still, for the benefit of Mr. Eberhard, it is not superfluous to
8: 229 note here that a predicate, which is attributed to a subject by an a priori
proposition, is for that very reason asserted to belong to it necessarily (be
inseparable from the concept thereof ). The latter are also called predicates that belong to the essence or inner possibility of the concept (ad
essentiam* pertinentia), so that all propositions which are valid a priori must
contain them; the others, namely those that are separable from the concept (without detriment to it) are called extra-essential marks (extraessentialia). Now the first belong to the essence, either as constituents thereof
(ut constitutiva), or as consequences of it, adequately grounded therein
(ut rationata). They are called essential parts (essentialia), which therefore contain no predicate that might be derived from others contained
in the same concept, and their totality constitutes the logical essence
(essentia); the second are called properties (attributa). The extra-essential
marks are either inner (modi) or relational marks (relationes), and cannot
serve as predicates in propositions a priori, because they are separable
from the concept of the subject, and therefore not necessarily connected
with it. – Now it is clear that if one has not already given some prior
* In order to avoid even the least appearance of a circular explanation with these
words, one may use instead of the expression ad essentiam what is here the
equivalent expression ad internam possibilitatem pertinentia.
318
criterion for a synthetic proposition a priori, to say that its predicate is
an attribute would in no way illuminate its distinction from an analytic
proposition. For by calling it an attribute nothing more is said than that
it may be derived as a necessary consequence from the essence: whether
analytically, by the principle of contradiction, or synthetically, by some
other principle, remains thereby completely undetermined. Thus, in the
proposition ‘every body is divisible,’ the predicate is an attribute, because
it can be derived as a necessary consequence from an essential part of
the concept of the subject, namely extension. But it is an attribute which
is represented as belonging to the concept of body by the principle of
contradiction; therefore the proposition itself, even though it asserts an
attribute of the subject, is nevertheless analytic. Permanence, on the
other hand, is also an attribute of substance; for it is an absolutely necessary predicate thereof, but it is not contained in the concept of substance
itself, and so cannot be derived from it by any analysis (by the principle of
contradiction), and thus the proposition ‘every substance is permanent’
is a synthetic proposition. If it is therefore said of a proposition that it 8: 230
has for its predicate an attribute of the subject, nobody yet knows if it
is analytic or synthetic; one must therefore add: it contains a synthetic
attribute, i.e., a necessary (albeit derived), and thus a priori knowable
predicate in a synthetic judgment. So according to Mr. Eberhard, the
explanation of synthetic judgments a priori is that they are judgments
which assert synthetic attributes of things. Mr. Eberhard plunges into
this tautology in order, where possible, not only to say something better
and more determinate about the character of synthetic judgments a priori, but also with the definition of them to indicate at the same time their
general principle, whereby their possibility can be judged, a task which
the Critique was able to accomplish only after much difficult labor. According to him (p. 315): “analytic judgments are those whose predicates
assert the essence or some of the essential parts of the subject; synthetic
judgments, however (p. 316), if they are necessary truths, have attributes
for their predicates.” Through the word ‘attribute’ he characterized synthetic judgments as judgments a priori (owing to the necessity of their
predicates), but at the same time as those which assert the rationata of
the essence, not the essence itself or some of its parts; he is thus alluding
to the principle of sufficient reason, by means of which alone they can
be predicated of the subject, and was relying on it not being noticed
that here this ground should only be a logical ground, namely one which
says no more than that the predicate is being derived from the concept
of the subject, only mediately, to be sure, but still always in accordance
with the principle of contradiction; whence, even though it asserts an
attribute, it can then still be analytic, and so does not bear the hallmark
of a synthetic proposition. He was very careful to avoid saying openly
that it would have to be a synthetic attribute in order for the proposition
319
to which it serves as predicate to be assignable to the latter class; though
it must surely have occurred to him that this limitation is necessary; for
otherwise the tautology would have been all too plainly apparent, and so
he came out with something which to the inexperienced seems to be new
and substantive, but in fact is merely a haze that is easily seen through.
We now also see what is signified by his principle of sufficient reason,
which he propounded above in such a way that we were led to believe
8: 231 (to judge primarily by the example there cited) that he understood by it a
real ground, since ground and consequence are distinct from one another
realiter and the proposition which combines them is in this way a synthetic proposition. By no means! Already at that point he was shrewdly
looking ahead to future instances of its use, and had stated it in so indeterminate a manner that he could give it whatever meaning the occasion
required, and so might also use it now and then as the principle of analytic judgments without the reader noticing it. Is the proposition ‘every
body is divisible’ any the less analytic because its predicate is first of all
derivable by analysis from that which pertains immediately to the concept (to the essential part), namely extension? If, from a predicate which
is directly cognized in a concept by the principle of contradiction, another is inferred, which is likewise derived therefrom by the principle of
contradiction, is it any the less derived from that concept by the principle
of contradiction than the first one?
It is therefore apparent: first, that the hope of explaining synthetic
propositions a priori through propositions which have attributes of their
subject as predicates is destroyed, unless one is willing to add to this that
they are synthetic, and so perpetrate an obvious tautology; second, that
limits are set to the principle of sufficient reason, if it is to yield a special
principle, viz., that it will never be admitted as such into transcendental philosophy save insofar as it legitimizes a synthetic connection of
concepts. We may now compare with this the joyous proclamation of
our author (p. 317): “So we would thus have already derived the distinction of judgments into analytic and synthetic, and indeed with the
most accurate demarcation of their boundaries (that the first pertains merely
to the essentials,a the second to attributes), from the most fruitful and
illuminating principle of division (an allusion to his previously vaunted
fertile fields of ontology), and with the fullest certainty that the division
completely exhausts its principle of division.”
Yet in this triumphant cry of victory Mr. Eberhard does not seem to
be so wholly assured. For on p. 318, after taking it as fully established
8: 232 that Wolff and Baumgarten would have long known and expressly characterized, albeit in different terms, what the Critique merely puts forward
under a different name, he becomes at once uncertain which predicates
a Essentialien
320
in synthetic judgments I may well have in mind; and now he raises such
a dust cloud of distinctions and classifications of the predicates that can
occur in judgments, that the topic in hand can no longer be seen for it;
all in order to demonstrate that I should have defined synthetic judgments,
especially the a priori variety, as distinct from the analytic, in some other
way than I have done. Nor is there anything said here of my manner of
solving the problem of how such judgments are possible, but only of what
I understand thereby, and that, if I accept one kind of predicate in them
(p. 319), my concept is too wide, but that if I understand them to be of
another kind (p. 320), it is too narrow. Yet it is clear that if a concept first
proceeds from the definition, it is impossible for it to be too narrow or
too wide, for it then signifies nothing more, and also nothing less, than
what the definition says of it. The only thing that might still be objected
to in it would be that it contains something inherently incomprehensible,
which is thus of no value to the explanation. But the greatest master in
the obfuscation of what is clear can bring nothing against the definition
the Critique gives of synthetic propositions: they are propositions whose
predicate contains more in it than is really thought in the concept of the
subject; in other words, through whose predicate something is added to
the thought of the subject, which was not contained therein; analytic are
those whose predicate merely contains the same as what was thought
in the concept of the subject of these judgments. Now the predicate of
the first kind of propositions may, if they are a priori propositions, be an
attribute (of the subject of the judgment) or who knows what else, but
this determination neither can nor ought to enter into the definition,
even were it to be demonstrated of the subject in a manner as instructive as that employed by Mr. Eberhard; that belongs to the deduction
of the possibility of the cognition of things through judgments of that
kind, which must first appear after the definition. But now he finds the
definition incomprehensible, too wide or too narrow, because it does
not accord with his own allegedly more precise determination of the
predicate of such judgments.
In order to bring a perfectly clear and simple matter into as much
confusion as possible, Mr. Eberhard employs a variety of expedients,
though the effect they have is entirely contrary to his purpose.
“The whole of metaphysics,” he claims (p. 308), “according to
Mr. Kant, contains nothing but analytic judgments,” and in support of this
allegation he cites a passage from the Prolegomena (p. 33).19 He states this 8: 233
as if I were saying it of metaphysics in general, when at that point my sole
concern is with previous metaphysics insofar as its propositions are based on
valid demonstrations. For of metaphysics in itself the Prolegomena asserts
(p. 36): “Properly metaphysical judgments are one and all synthetic.”20 But
even as to previous metaphysics, it is said in the Prolegomena, immediately after the passage cited, “that it also presents synthetic propositions,
321
which are readily granted to it, though it has never demonstrated them a
priori.” So what is affirmed in the passage in question is not that previous
metaphysics contains no synthetic propositions (for it has more than
enough of them), and among them some that are perfectly true (namely
those that are principles of a possible experience), but only that it has
not demonstrated any of them on a priori grounds; and to refute this
assertion of mine, Mr. Eberhard would have needed to provide only one
such apodictically demonstrated proposition; for the principle of sufficient reason with its demonstration (pp. 163–64 of his Magazine) will
certainly not refute my assertion. Equally fictitious is the claim (p. 314)
“that I assert that mathematics is the only science that contains synthetic
judgments a priori.” He has not cited the place where this was supposedly
said by me; but the second part of the main transcendental question, how
pure natural science is possible (Prolegomena, pp. 71–124),21 should have
made it perfectly obvious to him that I expressly maintain the opposite,
had he not been bent on seeing the very contrary of this. On p. 318 he
ascribes to me the claim that, “apart from the judgments of mathematics, only the judgments of experience are synthetic,” even though the
Critique (First Edition, pp. 158–235) presents the idea of a complete system of metaphysical, and indeed synthetic principles, and establishes them
through a priori demonstrations. My assertion was that these principles
are nevertheless only principles of the possibility of experience; he takes this
to mean “that they are only empirical judgments,” thereby making what
I term a ground of experience into a consequence of it. Thus everything
that comes into his hands from the Critique is first marred and distorted
in order to let it appear for a moment in a false light.
Yet another stratagem, so as to avoid being tied down to his counter-
8: 234 assertions, is that he presents them in completely general terms and
as abstractly as possible, and takes care not to give any example, from
which it might be known with certainty what he wants to claim. Thus,
on p. 318 he divides the attributes into those that are cognized either a
priori or a posteriori, and says that it seems to him that I understand by my
synthetic judgments “merely the not absolutely necessary truths, and of
the absolutely necessary, the latter kind of judgments, whose necessary
predicates can be cognized only a posteriori by the human understanding.” It seems to me, however, that something else should have been
said by these words than he actually did say; for as they stand, they
contain an obvious contradiction. Predicates that are cognized only a
posteriori but yet as necessary, and likewise attributes of such a nature
that, according to p. 321, they “cannot be derived from the essence of
the subject” are by the explanation which Mr. Eberhard himself gave
above of the latter, completely inconceivable things. But if something
is nevertheless thought thereby, and if an answer is to be given to the
objection that Mr. Eberhard raises, by his barely intelligible distinction,
322
to the usefulness of the definition of synthetic judgments given in the
Critique, then he should have offered an example of this strange species
of attribute; for I cannot refute an objection to which I am unable to
attach any meaning. He avoids, as much as he can, introducing examples from metaphysics, but restricts himself, as long as possible, to those
from mathematics, whereby he also proceeds entirely in accordance with
his best interests. For he wishes to escape from the severe rebuke that
previous metaphysics has been absolutely unable to demonstrate its synthetic propositions a priori (because it wishes to demonstrate them from
their concepts as valid of things-in-themselves), and he therefore always
chooses examples from mathematics, whose propositions are grounded
in rigorous proofs because they are based upon a priori intuition; though
certainly he cannot let this rank as an essential condition of the possibility of all synthetic propositions a priori, without at the same time giving
up all hope of extending his cognition to the super-sensible, to which
no intuition possible for us corresponds, and thus leaving uncultivated
his potentially fertile fields of psychology and theology. So if we cannot
particularly applaud either his insight or his willingness to shed light on
a controversial subject, we must at least do justice to his prudence in
neglecting no advantage, were it only a seeming one.
But when it happens that Mr. Eberhard stumbles, as if by chance, upon
an example from metaphysics, he always comes to grief with it, in that it 8: 235
proves the very opposite of what he thereby sought to confirm. He had
earlier wished to prove that there must be another principle of the possibility of things besides the principle of contradiction, and says, indeed,
that it would have to be deduced from the principle of contradiction,
as he then in fact also attempts to derive it. He now says p. 319: “The
proposition: everything necessary is eternal, all necessary truths are eternal truths, is obviously a synthetic proposition, and yet it can be cognized a
priori.” It is, however, obviously analytic, and one can sufficiently see from
this example what a distorted conception Mr. Eberhard continues to have
of this distinction among propositions, with which he claims to be so
thoroughly conversant. For he will not, of course, want to regard truth
as a particular thing existing in time, whose existence is either eternal or
only persists for a certain time. That all bodies are extended is necessarily
and eternally true, whether they exist now or not, and whether that existence is brief or lengthy, or goes on throughout all time, i.e., eternally.
The proposition says only: these truths do not depend upon experience
(which must occur at one time or another), and are therefore not limited
by any temporal conditions, i.e., they are cognizable as truths a priori,
which is completely identical with the proposition: they are cognizable
as necessary truths.
The same applies to the example introduced on p. 325, which must
also be noted as an example of his punctiliousness in referring to
323
propositions of the Critique, in that he says: “I do not see how one can
wish to deprive metaphysics of all synthetic judgments.” Now far from
doing this, the Critique (as has already been noted) has, on the contrary,
presented an entire and, in fact, complete system of such judgments as
true principles; though it has at the same time shown that they collectively express only the synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition (as
condition of the possibility of experience), and are therefore applicable
to objects only insofar as they can be given in intuition. The metaphysical example which he now offers of synthetic propositions a priori,
8: 236 though with the cautious qualification: if metaphysics demonstrates such
a proposition,22 viz., all finite things are mutable, and the infinite thing
is immutable, is in both parts analytic. For realiter, i.e., as to existence, the
mutable is that whose determinations can follow one another in time; so
only that is mutable which cannot exist other than in time. This condition
is not, however, necessarily connected with the concept of a finite thing
as such (which does not have all reality), but only with a thing as object of
sensory intuition. Now since Mr. Eberhard wishes to affirm his a priori
propositions as independent of this latter condition, his proposition that
everything finite is, as such, mutable (i.e., as to its mere concept, and
thus even as noumenon) is false. So the proposition: everything finite is,
as such, mutable, would have to be understood only from the determination of its concept, and thus logically, since in that case by ‘mutable’
would be meant that which is not thoroughly determined through its
concept, and thus what can be determined in many opposing ways. But
in that case the proposition that finite things, i.e., all save the most real
being, are logically mutable (in regard to the concept which one can form
of them) would be an analytic proposition; for it is completely identical
to say: I think a thing finite in that it does not possess all reality, and to
say: through the concept thereof it is not determined what, or how much
reality I should accord to it, i.e., I can attribute now this, now that to it,
and change its determination in many ways without affecting the concept
of its finitude. It is in just the same way, namely logically, that the infinite
being is immutable; for if by it is understood that being which, in virtue
of its concept, can have nothing save reality as its predicate and hence is
already thoroughly determined thereby (with regard, that is, to predicates of which we are uncertaina whether or not they are truly real), then
a The Akademie-Ausgabe, as well as other standard editions, all have gewiss
[certain]. But, as Manfred Gawlina has suggested in correspondence, Kant
must have meant ungewiss. Kant’s concern here is to contrast the logical with
the real, and his point is that, though we know that an infinite being is immutable in virtue of its concept (logically), since it is the concept of a being
that is thoroughly determined, we do not know whether the predicates we
attribute to such a being on this basis are objectively real. If we did we would
have synthetic a priori knowledge of its nature, which is just what Kant denies.
324
no single predicate of it can be replaced by another without prejudice
to its concept; but at the same time this shows it to be a merely analytic
proposition, namely one that attributes no other predicate to its subject
than can be derived from it through the principle of contradiction.* If
we play with mere concepts, without considering their objective reality, 8: 237
then we can very easily produce many such illusory extensions of science without needing intuition; but it is quite another matter when the
aim is to extend our cognition of the object. Another such extension,
though a merely apparent one, is to be found in the proposition: the
infinite being (taken in the above metaphysical sense) is itself not mutable realiter, i.e., its inner determinations do not follow one another in
time (since its existence as mere noumenon cannot without contradiction be thought in time), which is likewise a merely analytic proposition,
if we presuppose the synthetic principles of space and time to be formal
intuitions of things as phenomena. For it is then identical with the proposition of the Critique: the concept of the most real being is not the concept of a
phenomenon, and so far from expanding our cognition of the infinite being
as a synthetic proposition, it precludes that concept from any expansion
by denying it intuition. – Still, it should be noted that in enunciating
the above-mentioned proposition, Mr. Eberhard cautiously adds, “if
metaphysics can demonstrate it.” I have immediately indicated the
premise whereby it tends to deceive, as though it entailed a synthetic 8: 238
proposition, and which is also the only possible means whereby determinations (such as that of the immutable), which have a certain sense
* Among the propositions that belong merely to logic, but by the ambiguity of
their expression are palmed off as metaphysical, and thus, in spite of being
analytic, are taken to be synthetic, belongs also the proposition: the essences of
things are immutable, i.e., one cannot alter anything in what essentially belongs
to their concept without simultaneously abolishing the concept itself. This
proposition, which occurs in Baumgarten’s Metaphysics §13223 and indeed in
the Chapter on the mutable and immutable, where alteration is (quite properly)
explained by the existence of a thing’s determinations one after another (their
succession), and thus by their sequence in time, sounds as if thereby a law of
nature were being promulgated, which expanded our concepts of the objects
of the senses (especially since the topic is existence in time). So even novices
believe they have learned something considerable by this, and by declaring
that the essences of things are immutable make short work, for example, of
the opinion of some mineralogists, that silica might be gradually transformed
into alumina. But this metaphysical adage is a poor identical proposition that
has nothing whatever to do with the existence of things, and their possible
or impossible alterations; it belongs entirely to logic, and enjoins something
that nobody can think of denying anyway, namely that if I want to retain the
concept of one and the same object, I must not alter anything in it, i.e., must
not predicate of it the opposite of what I think thereby.
325
in relation to the logical essence (of the concept), are subsequently employed in a completely different sense, in relation to the real essence
(the nature of the object). So the reader need not let himself be put off
with dilatory answers (which in the end will still come from dear Baumgarten, who also takes concept for thing), but can judge for himself on
the spot.
One sees from the entire discussion here that Mr. Eberhard either
has no concept whatever of synthetic judgments a priori, or, more probably, that he deliberately seeks to confuse it so that the reader will
grow doubtful of what is well within reach. The only two metaphysical
examples he would dearly like to slip through as synthetic, though when
carefully considered they are analytic, are: all necessary truths are eternal
(here he could just as well have used the word immutable), and: the necessary being is immutable. The paucity of examples, when the Critique
offers him a number of them that are genuinely synthetic, is quite easy to
explain. He was concerned to have such predicates for his judgments as
he could demonstrate to be attributes of the subject from the mere concept thereof. Now since this will not do if the predicate is synthetic, he
had to seek out one that has already been commonly played with in metaphysics, in that it has sometimes been considered in its merely logical
relation to the concept of the subject, and sometimes in its real relation
to the object, while yet a single meaning was thought to be found therein,
namely the concept of the mutable and immutable; which predicate, if
the existence of its subject is posited in time, certainly yields an attribute
of this subject and a synthetic judgment, but then also presupposes sensory intuition and the thing itself, although only as phenomenon, which
it by no means suited him to assume, however, as a condition of synthetic judgments. Now instead of taking the predicate immutable as valid
of things (in their existence), he employs it of concepts of things, since
then, indeed, immutability becomes an attribute of all predicates, insofar as they necessarily belong to a certain concept; now this concept
may itself have some object corresponding to it, or it may also be an
8: 239 empty concept. – He had already played the same game before with the
principle of sufficient reason.a We were supposed to think that he was
presenting a metaphysical proposition, which determines something of
things a priori, and it is a merely logical one, which says nothing more
than that for a judgment to be a proposition, it must be represented not
merely as possible (problematic) but at the same time as grounded (no
matter whether it be analytic or synthetic). The metaphysical principle
of causality was very dear to him; but he took care not to touch it (for
the example which he gives of it does not accord with the universality
of that supposedly supreme principle of all synthetic judgments). The
a Satz des Grundes
326
reason was that he wanted to slip through a logical rule, which is wholly
analytic and abstracts from every particularity of things, as a principle of
nature, which is solely the business of metaphysics.
Mr. Eberhard must have feared that the reader might eventually see
through this deception, and to put it once and for all out of sight he
therefore says at the conclusion of this issue (p. 331) that “the dispute as
to whether a proposition be analytic or synthetic is of little moment in
regard to its logical truth.” But in vain. Plain common sense must seize
hold of this question once it is clearly posed to it. That I can extend
my cognition beyond a given concept is taught me by the daily increase
of my knowledge through an ever-enlarging experience. But if it is said
that I can increase it beyond the given concepts even without experience,
i.e., can judge synthetically a priori, and to this it is added that something
more is necessarily required for this purpose than to have these concepts,
that a ground is also needed whereby I can truthfully add more than I already think in them, then I would laugh at anyone who told me that this
proposition, that I must also have some ground beyond my concept, in
order to say more than lies within it, is that very principle, which already
suffices for this extension, in that I only need represent to myself this
addition, which I think a priori as pertaining to the concept of a thing,
though not contained in it, as an attribute. For I want to know what sort
of ground it may be, which, besides what is essentially proper to my
concept and what I already knew, acquaints me with more, and does so
necessarily, as an attribute belonging to a thing, albeit not contained in
its concept. Now I found that the extension of my cognition through
experience rests upon empirical (sensory) intuition, in which I encoun- 8: 240
tered much that corresponded to my concept, but could also learn more
than was yet thought in this concept, as connected thereto. Now once
it is pointed out to me, I can easily see that, if an extension of cognition
beyond my concept is to take place a priori, then, just as an empirical
intuition was needed there, so a pure intuition a priori will be needed
for the latter purpose; I am merely at a loss where to find it and how I
am to explain its possibility. But now I am instructed by the Critique to
omit all that is empirical or sensibly real in space and time, and thus to
abolish all things in their empirical representation, and I then find that
space and time remain over, like single beings, whose intuition precedes
all concepts of them and of the things in them; and that given such a constitution for these originary modes of representation, I am nevermore
to think of them as anything but merely subjective (though positive)
forms of my sensibility (not merely as a lack of clarity in the representations obtained through them), not as forms of things-in-themselves, but
only as forms of the objects of all sensory intuition, and hence of mere
appearances. From this it now becomes clear to me, not only how synthetic cognitions a priori may be possible in both mathematics and natural
327
science, in that these a priori intuitions make this extension possible, and
the synthetic unity which the understanding must in each case give to
the manifold in order to think an object thereof makes it actual; but I
must also realize that, since the understanding for its part cannot intuit,
these synthetic propositions a priori cannot be extended beyond the limits of sensory intuition: because all concepts going beyond this sphere are
empty and must be without a corresponding object; for in order to attain
such cognitions, I would either have to omit from the means I employ
for cognition of objects of the senses, something which in such cognition
can never be omitted, or else combine the remainder as it can never be
combined therein, and so venture to form concepts about which, though
they do not contain a contradiction, I still can never know whether or not
in general an object corresponds to them, and which therefore remain
completely empty for me.
By comparing what is said here with what Mr. Eberhard proclaims
from p. 316 on in his exposition of synthetic judgments, the reader may
8: 241 now judge for himself which one of us offers for public consumption
empty verbiage rather than solid knowledge.
On p. 316, too, the characterization is, “that in eternal truths they have
as their predicates attributes of the subject; in temporal truths, contingent
properties or relations,” and he now compares what p. 317 calls this
“most fruitful and illuminating” principle of division, with the concept
the Critique gives of them, namely that synthetic judgments are those
whose principle is not the principle of contradiction! “But what is it
then?,” Mr. Eberhard asks indignantly, and thereupon designates his
discovery (allegedly drawn from Leibniz’s writings), namely the principle
of sufficient reason, which along with the principle of contradiction, on
which analytic judgments turn, is thus the second hinge on which the
human understanding moves, namely in its synthetic judgments.
From what I have just set forth as a summary of the analytic portion
of the critique of the understanding, we now see that the latter expounds
with all necessary detail the principle of synthetic judgments in general,
which follows necessarily from their definition: that they are not possible
save under the condition of an intuition underlying the concept of their subject,
which, if they are judgments of experience, is empirical, and if they are
synthetic judgments a priori, is pure intuition a priori. Any reader must
easily discern what consequences this proposition may have, not only
for determining the limits of the use of human reason, but even for
insight into the true nature of our sensibility (for it can be demonstrated
independently of the derivation of the representations of space and time,
and thus serve to demonstrate their ideality, even before we have inferred
it from their inner nature).
Compare with this the alleged principle which the Eberhardian determination of the nature of synthetic propositions a priori involves. “They
328
are those which assert of the concept of a subject the attributes thereof,”
i.e., those which belong to it necessarily but only as consequences, and
because, when so regarded, they must be related to some ground, their
possibility is conceivable through the principle of [sufficient] reason.a
But now one justifiably asks whether this ground of its predicate is to
be sought in the subject according to the principle of contradiction (in 8: 242
which case the judgment, in spite of the principle of [sufficient] reason,
would always be merely analytic), or cannot be derived by that principle
from the concept of the subject, in which case alone is the attribute
synthetic. Therefore neither the name ‘attribute’ nor the principle of
sufficient reason distinguishes synthetic from analytic judgments; but
if by the former are meant judgments a priori, then nothing more can
be intended by this designation than that their predicate is necessarily grounded in some way in the essence of the concept of the subject,
and is thus an attribute, but not merely in consequence of the principle
of contradiction. But now how, as synthetic attribute, it can come into
connection with the concept of the subject, when it cannot be extracted
therefrom by an analysis of the latter, is not to be learned from the concept of an attribute and the proposition that it has some ground; and
Mr. Eberhard’s definition is thus completely empty. The Critique, however, clearly points to this ground of the possibility: namely that it will
have to be the pure intuition underlying the concept of the subject
whereby it is possible, indeed alone possible, to link a synthetic predicate
a priori with a concept.
What is decisive here is that logic can give absolutely no information
concerning the question of how synthetic propositions are possible a
priori. Were it to say: derive from what constitutes the essence of your
concept the synthetic predicates sufficiently determined thereby (which
are then called attributes), then we are no further along than before.
How am I to set about going with my concept beyond this concept itself,
affirming more of it than is thought therein? The problem will never
be solved if, as logic does, one takes into consideration the conditions
of cognition merely from the side of the understanding. Sensibility, and
that as a faculty of a priori intuition, must also be taken into account, and
whoever hopes to find consolation in the classifications which logic
makes of concepts (in that it abstracts, as it must, from all objects thereof )
will lose his trouble and toil. Mr. Eberhard does however, judge logic
in this way and from the indications he derives from the concept of attributes (and that principle of synthetic judgments a priori which solely
belongs to them, the principle of sufficient reason), perceives it as so
pregnant and promising for the solution of dark questions in transcen- 8: 243
dental philosophy that he even sketches (p. 322) a new table of the
a Princip des Grundes
329
division of judgments for logic (in which, however, the author of the
Critique declines to occupy the place assigned to him), to which Jacob
Bernoulli has prompted him, by an allegedly new division of these judgments, cited on p. 320.24 One might well say of such innovations in logic
what was once said in a learned journal: “Alas! someone has once again
invented a new thermometer.” For as long as one must be satisfied with
the two fixed points of division, the freezing and boiling points of water,
without being able to determine how the temperature at either point is
related to absolute temperature, it matters little whether the interval is
divided into eighty or one hundred degrees, etc. Thus, so long as we
have not yet been instructed in general how the attributes (synthetic, of
course), which cannot be derived from the concept of the subject itself,
arrive nevertheless at being necessary predicates of it (p. 322, I, 2), or
even can be received as such by the subject, all that systematic division
intended to explain the possibility of judgments, which it can seldom ever
do anyway, is a totally useless burden on the memory and would hardly
find a place in any new system of logic, just as the bare idea of synthetic
judgments a priori (which Mr. Eberhard very absurdly calls nonessential )
does not belong to logic at all.
Finally, a word about the claim advanced by Mr. Eberhard and others
that the distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments is not new,
but has long been known (and presumably also neglected because of its
insignificance). To someone concerned with truth, especially if he uses a
distinction of a type at least unattempted till now, it can matter little if it
has already been made by someone else; and it is, of course, the common
fate of everything new in the sciences that, if nothing can be said against
it, it is at least found to have been long known by our elders. But if, from
an observation presented as new, strikingly important consequences at
once meet the eye, that could not possibly have been overlooked if it had
already been made elsewhere, then a suspicion would still have to arise as
to the correctness or importance of that very division, which might stand
8: 244 in the way of its use. But now if the latter is put beyond doubt, and there
is likewise no mistaking the necessity with which these consequences
obtrude, then one may assume with the utmost probability that it had
not yet been made.
Now the question of how cognition a priori is possible has long been
raised and discussed, especially since the time of Locke; what would then
be more natural than that, as soon as the distinction between the analytic
and synthetic had been clearly noted therein, this general question would
have been restricted to the particular one: how are synthetic judgments
possible a priori? For as soon as this has been raised, it becomes apparent
to everyone that the success or failure of metaphysics depends entirely
upon how the latter problem might come to be resolved; all dogmatic
dealings with that subject would assuredly have been suspended until
330
sufficient information had been received concerning this single problem;
a critique of pure reason would have become the watchword before which
even the loudest trumpeting of its dogmatic claims could not have prevailed. But now, since this has not happened, one can only conclude
that the aforesaid distinction among judgments has never been properly
discerned. This was also inevitable, if it was regarded in the manner of
Mr. Eberhard, who extracts from the predicates of judgments a mere distinction of attributes from the essence and essential parts of the subject,
and was thus assigned to logic; for the latter has nothing to do with the
possibility of cognition in regard to its content, but merely with its form
insofar as it is a discursive cognition, whereas investigation of the origin
of a priori cognition of objects must be left exclusively to transcendental
philosophy. Nor could this insight and positive usefulness have been
achieved by the said division, when it exchanged, for the terms analytic and synthetic, expressions so badly chosen as those of identical and
nonidentical judgments. For the latter provide not the slightest indication
of a particular manner of possibility for any such unification of representations a priori; whereas the term synthetic judgment (as opposed to
analytic) immediately carries with it an allusion to an a priori synthesis in
general, and must naturally prompt the investigation, which is no longer
logical but already transcendental, as to whether there are not concepts 8: 245
(categories) which affirm nothing else but the pure synthetic unity of a
manifold (in some intuition) with regard to the concept of an object in
general, and which lie a priori at the basis of all cognition thereof; and
since these [concepts] concern merely the thought of an object in general, whether the manner in which it would have to be given, namely
a form of its intuition, must not likewise be presupposed a priori for
any such synthetic cognition; since then the attention directed to this
point would inevitably have transformed that logical distinction, which
otherwise can be of no use, into a transcendental problem.
It was therefore no mere verbal affectation, but a step in the advance
of knowledge, when the Critique made knowable for the first time the
distinction between judgments which rest entirely on the principle of
identity or contradiction, and those which require another principle, by
naming them analytic as opposed to synthetic judgments. For by the
term synthesis it is clearly indicated that something outside of the given
concept must be added as a substrate, which makes it possible to go beyond the concept with my predicates; so that the investigation is directed
to the possibility of a synthesis of representations with regard to cognition in general, which soon had to lead to a recognition of intuition as
its indispensable condition, but of pure intuition for a priori cognition;
a direction that could not be expected through the characterization of
synthetic judgments as nonidentical, and has never in fact resulted from
it. In order to be satisfied of this, we have only to examine the examples
331
hitherto cited to prove that the distinction in question is already known
and fully developed in philosophy, albeit under other names. The first
one (pointed out by myself, though only as somewhat like it) is from
Locke,25 who assigns what he calls knowledge of coexistence to judgments of experience, and knowledge of relation to moral judgments; but
he does not give a name to the synthetic aspect of judgments in general;
nor, by this distinction from propositions of identity, has he extracted
the most trifling of general rules for pure a priori cognition as such. The
example from Reusch26 belongs entirely to logic, and merely shows the
two different ways of clarifying given concepts, without concern for any
expansion of cognition, especially a priori, with regard to objects. The
8: 246 third, from Crusius,27 alludes only to metaphysical propositions that are
not demonstrable through the principle of contradiction. No one has
therefore grasped this distinction in its universality, for the purpose of a
critique of reason in general; for otherwise mathematics, with its great
abundance of synthetic a priori cognition, would have had to be cited
as a prime example, though its prominence in comparison with pure
philosophy, and the latter’s poverty with respect to such propositions
(though it is rich enough in the analytic variety), would inevitably have
been bound to occasion an investigation into the possibility of the former. Meanwhile, it may be left to anyone to judge whether or not he
is conscious of having already had this distinction in general before his
eyes, or of having found it in other authors; just so long as he does not
on that account neglect the said inquiry as superfluous and its goal as
long since attained.
* *
*
May we be finished now and forever with this discussion of what is
supposedly a mere reinstatement of an older critique of pure reason,
which gives metaphysics the right to extensive claims. It has emerged
with sufficient clarity that, if there ever was such a critique, it was at
least not granted to Mr. Eberhard to see it, to understand it, or at any
point to satisfy this need of philosophy, even at second hand. – The other
brave men, who till now have endeavored by their objections to keep the
critical enterprise on course, will not interpret this single exception to my
resolve (not to involve myself in any formal controversy), as implying that
their arguments and philosophical standing have struck me as of lesser
importance; it has happened this once, only in order to call attention to
a certain mode of conduct that has something typical about it, and seems
characteristic of Mr. Eberhard and to be worthy of note. For the rest,
may the Critique of Pure Reason continue to stand firm, if it can, through
its intrinsic solidity. Once it has gained currency, it will not disappear
332
without at least having engendered a sounder system of pure philosophy
than was previously to be had. But if one tries to envisage such an event,
the current course of things affords ample evidence that the seeming
concord, which now reigns among opponents of the Critique, is really a 8: 247
covert discord, since they are poles apart as to the principle they propose
to set in its place. It would therefore provide us with an exhibition,
as amusing as it is instructive, if they would for a time set aside their
conflict with their common enemy in order to try to reach an accord
on the principles they wish to maintain against it; but they would be no
more likely ever to finish with that than the man who tried to construct
a bridge the length of the stream rather than across it.
Given the anarchy which inevitably prevails among philosophizing
folk, since it is only an invisible thing, namely reason, that they recognize
as their sole sovereign, it has always been a saving remedy to gather this
turbulent crew around some great man as a rallying point. But for those
with no understanding of their own, or no desire to use it, or who,
though not deficient in either, still behaved as if they had them only on
loan from someone else, to understand such a man was a difficulty, which
has hitherto prevented the formation of a durable constitution, and will
at least greatly impede the latter for a long time to come.
Leibniz’s metaphysics contained primarily three peculiarities: (1) the
principle of sufficient reason, and that so far as it was merely meant to
indicate the insufficiency of the principle of contradiction for the knowledge of necessary truths; (2) the doctrine of monads; (3) the doctrine of
the pre-established harmony. On account of these three principles, he
has been plagued by many opponents who did not understand him; but
he has also (as a great connoisseur, and worthy eulogist of his, remarks
on a certain occasion) been mistreated by his would-be followers and
interpreters;28 as also happened to other philosophers in antiquity, who
might well have said: God protect us only from our friends; our enemies,
we can take care of for ourselves.
I. Is it really credible that Leibniz wished to have his principle of sufficient reason construed objectively (as a natural law), when he attributed
great importance to it as an addition to previous philosophy? It is, of
course, so generally acknowledged and (within suitable limits) so manifestly clear, that not even the weakest mind can believe itself to have 8: 248
made therein a new discovery; and it has also been greeted with much
ridicule by opponents who have misunderstood it. But this principle was
for him a merely subjective one, having reference only to a critique of
reason. For what does it mean to say that there must be other principles
besides the principle of contradiction? It is to say, in effect, that by the
principle of contradiction can be known only what already lies in the concept of the object; if something more is to be said of it [the object], then
something else must be added beyond this concept, and to show how this
333
is possible we have to look for a special principle, distinct from that of
contradiction, i.e., it will have to have its special ground. Since the latter
kind of propositions are (now at least) called synthetic, Leibniz wanted
to say only that beyond the principle of contradiction (as the principle
of analytic judgments), still another principle, namely that of synthetic
judgments, must be added. This was certainly a new and noteworthy
pointer to investigations that were yet to be instituted in metaphysics
(and in fact have only lately begun there). Now if his disciple proclaims
this pointer to a separate principle, which at that time was still sought,
to be the (already found) principle (of synthetic cognition) itself, and if
Leibniz has been thought thereby to have made a new discovery, is this
follower not exposing him to ridicule, just when he thought that he was
singing his praises?
II. Is it really believable that Leibniz, such a great mathematician!
wanted to compose bodies out of monads (and hence space out of simple
parts)? He did not mean the physical world, but rather its substrate, unknowable by us, the intelligible world, which lies merely in the Idea of
reason and in which we really do have to represent everything we think
therein as composite substance to be composed of simple substances.
He also seems, with Plato, to attribute to the human mind an original,
though by now dim, intellectual intuition of these super-sensible beings,
though from this he inferred nothing concerning sensible beings, which
he would wish to be taken for things related to a special mode of intuition, of which we are capable solely with regard to cognitions that are
possible for us, in the strictest sense as mere appearances, tied to (specific,
particular) forms of intuition; we should not therefore let ourselves be
disturbed by his account of sensibility as a confused mode of represen-
8: 249 tation, but must rather replace it by another, more suited to his purpose;
for otherwise his system will be inconsistent. Now to accept this error as
a deliberate and wise precaution on his part (as imitators, to be just like
their original, also copy his gestures and faults of speech) can scarcely
be credited to them as a service to their master’s honor. The innateness
of certain concepts, as an expression for a fundamental faculty with respect to a priori principles of our cognition, which he uses merely against
Locke, who recognizes only an empirical origin, is likewise incorrectly
understood if it is taken literally.
III. Is it possible to believe that, by his pre-established harmony
between soul and body, Leibniz should have understood the accord of
two entities that are by nature completely independent of each other,
and cannot be brought into community through any powers of their
own? That would be precisely to proclaim idealism; for why should we
accept bodies at all, if it is possible to view everything that happens in
the soul as an effect of its own powers, which it would also exercise
that way in complete isolation? Soul and that substrate of appearances,
334
wholly unknown to us, which we call body, are, to be sure, entirely
different entities, but these appearances themselves, as mere forms of its
intuition, resting on the constitution of the subject (soul), are merely
representations, and there the community between understanding and
sensibility in the same subject can well be conceived under certain a priori
laws, along with the necessary natural dependence of the latter [sensibility] upon external things, without surrendering these things to idealism. As for this harmony between understanding and sensibility, insofar
as it makes possible cognitions of universal laws of nature a priori, the
Critique has definitively shown that without it no experience is possible,
and that the objects (since they partly, as to their intuition, accord with
the formal conditions of our sensibility, and partly, as to the connection of the manifold, accord with the principles of its ordering in one
consciousness, as a condition of the possibility of cognition thereof )
would never be taken up by us into the unity of consciousness and enter
into experience, and would therefore be nothing for us. But we could still
provide no reason why we have precisely such a mode of sensibility and
an understanding of such a nature, that by their combination experience
becomes possible; nor yet, why, as otherwise fully heterogeneous sources
of cognition, they always conform so well to the possibility of empiri- 8: 250
cal cognition in general, but especially (as the Critique of Judgment will
intimate) for the possibility of an experience of nature under its manifold particular and merely empirical laws, of which the understanding
teaches us nothing a priori, as if nature were deliberately ordered for
our comprehension; this we could not further explain (and neither can
anyone else). Leibniz termed the ground of this agreement, especially
in regard to the cognition of body, and thereunder primarily our own,
as the middle ground of this relation, a pre-established harmony, by which
he had obviously not explained this agreement, nor was seeking to do
so, but was merely indicating that we would have to suppose thereby a
certain purposiveness in the dispositions of the supreme cause, of ourselves as well as of all things outside us; and this indeed as something
already lodged in creation (predetermined), albeit a predetermination,
not of things existing in separation, but only of the mental powers in us,
sensibility and understanding, each in its own way for the other, just as
the Critique teaches that for the a priori cognition of things they must
stand in a reciprocal relationship to one another in the mind. That this
was his true, though not clearly developed opinion, may be surmised
from the fact that he extends that pre-established harmony much further than to the agreement of soul and body, namely to that between the
Kingdoms of Nature and of Grace (the Kingdom of Ends in relation to
the final end, i.e., mankind under moral laws), where a harmony has
to be thought between the consequences of our concepts of nature
and those of our concept of freedom, a union, therefore, of two totally
335
different faculties, under wholly dissimilar principles in us, and not that
of a pair of different things, existing in harmony outside each other (as
morality actually requires); though, as the Critique teaches, it can by no
means be conceived from the constitution of the world, but rather as an
agreement that for us at least is contingent, and comprehensible only
through an intelligent world-cause.
In this way, then, the Critique of Pure Reason might well be the true
apology for Leibniz, even against those of his disciples who heap praises
upon him that do him no honor; as it may also be for sundry older
philosophers, whom many an historian of philosophy – for all the praise
8: 251 he bestows on them – still has talking utter nonsense; whose intention
he does not divine, in that he neglects the key to all accounts of what
pure reason produces from mere concepts, the critique of reason itself
(as the common source of all them), and in examining the words they
spoke, cannot see what they had wanted to say.