Section 
1. Start with something x that is substantial and composite,
and analyse it into its simpler elements; this process doesn’t
come to an end until we reach a part that is not a whole
·made up of simpler parts·, i.e. until we reach something
simple. The opposite process of synthesising—·combining
x with other substances·—doesn’t come to an end until
we reach something that isn’t a part ·of anything bigger·,
i.e. until we reach a world.
In this exposition of the concept of a world, I shall not
only attend to the marks appropriate to a distinct knowledge
of the object but shall also give some attention to its two-fold
origin in the nature of the mind. So the exposition may set
an example that leads to a deeper insight into metaphysical
method, which I see as well worth doing. For it is one
thing to (a) employ an abstract notion of the intellect to get
from a thought of the parts to a conception of the whole
that is composed of them, and it is a quite different thing
to (b) take this general notion ·of the composite whole· as
a problem set by reason, and to try to chase it down by
employing the sensitive faculty of knowing, i.e. representing
it in the concrete by a distinct intuition. In (a) composition
is secured through the class concept, if it’s the concept
of a plurality of mutually related things; so this is work for
universal ideas of the intellect. In (b) the endeavour is to
attain the concept of the composite in time, generating it by
successively adding part to part; and that is synthesis, a
process that is subject to the laws of intuition. Similarly,
given a substantial composite, we easily reach the idea of
its simple [see Glossary] parts by stripping from the thought
of it the intellectual notion of composition, because when
composition is removed whatever is left is simple. But when
the laws of intuitive knowledge are in play, it’s a different
story: the only way to remove composition now is by a regress
from the given whole to all its parts, this being an analysis
that occurs in time. [Kant has here a difficult footnote about two
kinds of analysis and a corresponding two kinds of synthesis. We don’t
need this for what follows.]. . . . Thus, for analysis to be carried
through to the point of yielding the concept of the simple, it
must be brought to a conclusion in a finite and assignable
time; and the same is true of a synthesis that is to be yield
the concept of the whole.
In a continuous quantum, however, one can’t get to the
end of the regress from whole to parts; and in an infinite
quantum one can’t get to the end of the progress from parts
1  
to whole. It follows that the analysis can’t be completed, nor
can the synthesis: the laws of intuition won’t let the whole
be represented completely as a composition ·of simple parts·,
or the composite be represented as a totality. And so we get
this situation:
(1) It is often assumed that ‘unrepresentable’ means the
same as ‘impossible’; and
(2) the laws of intuitive knowledge clearly make it impossible to represent the concepts of continuity and
infinitude;
and so we find that
(3) Many people reject these ·two· concepts ·because they
think they’re impossible·.
I am not here arguing in defence of these notions, rejected
as they are (especially the concept of continuity) by many of
the scholastics.1 But those who follow this highly perverse
line of argument should be urgently warned that they are
falling into a very serious error. Something that is
opposed to the laws of understanding and reason
is indeed impossible; but an object of pure reason which is
merely not subject to the laws of intuitive cognition
is not impossible. This disagreement between the sensitive
and the intellectual faculties (more about those later) shows
only this: when the mind receives •abstract ideas from the
intellect, it often can’t pull them through into something
•concrete and turn them into intuitions. But this subjective
inability gives many people a false impression of some objective hindrance, and deceives them, if they aren’t careful, into
taking the limits circumscribing the human mind for limits
imposed by the very essence of things outside the mind.
Furthermore, if substantial composites are given—
whether through the testimony of the senses or in any other
way—it’s easy to see, by an argument based on intellectual
grounds, that both •simples and •a world are also given. . . .
The notion of a world is not merely arbitrary, like a mathematical construct that has been invented only so as to
deduce consequences from it. For when your mind is directed
onto the concept of the composite, whether it’s engaged in
•breaking it up into smaller bits or •putting it together with
others, it demands and assumes in each of these procedures
that there are limits at which it may find rest.
2. The factors to be considered in the definition of a world
are these:
I. Matter, in a transcendental sense, i.e. the parts ·that the
world is composed of·—I’ll assume that they are substances.
[‘. . . in a transcendental sense’? Kant is here appealing to Aristotle’s
distinction between ‘matter’ and ‘form’, i.e. between •what there is and
1 Those who reject the actual mathematical infinite find that the rejection comes easily! (a) Some of them define infinite in such a way that it does
rather easily yield contradictions. According to them:
•an infinite quantum is one such that it’s impossible for any to be larger, and
•the mathematical infinite is a how-manyness [see Glossary] than which a greater is impossible.
But these define ‘maximum’ ·or ‘greatest’·, not ‘infinite’; and a greatest how-manyness is indeed impossible; and that’s how these people infer the
impossibility of this ‘infinite’ that they have invented! (b) Others speak of an infinite how-manyness as an infinite number, and show that this is
absurd, as it clearly is. But this is also fighting only with figments of the mind. If they had conceived the mathematical infinite [infinitum] as a
•how-many that is greater than any •number; and if they had seen that any definite [definitum] concept of a how-many can be attained only by
successively adding unit to unit and bringing this process to an end in a finite [finito] time; then they would have seen that things that don’t square
with a certain law of human knowledge might be known by some non-human intellect that could see some how-manyness at a glance, with no need
count it.
2  
•what it is like. In this context, ‘matter’ is used not in its everyday
empirical sense, standing for •a certain kind of stuff, but rather in its
‘transcendental’ sense, standing for •the things-or-stuff that the world is
made of—the whatever-it-is that has the ‘form’.]
It doesn’t matter whether my definition of ‘world’ squares
with the word’s meaning in ordinary language, because what
I am investigating is just the problem—arising according
to the laws of reason—of •how a number of substances
can coalesce into one, and •what brings it about that this
one is not a part of anything else. ·I use ‘world’ to mean
‘something that has parts and isn’t itself a part’, but that bit
of terminology isn’t essential to my inquiry·. [Kant goes on
to say that the ordinary-language meaning of ‘world’ does
in fact square with his technical meaning for it. He skips
through a few views about ‘worlds’ that are wrong when
the word is taken in his sense and that ordinary thoughtful
people would also think to be wrong. For example, Leibniz’s
view that ‘each soul is a little world’.] A final point: I haven’t
said anything about whether the substances that make up a
world are contingent or necessary; nor do I follow the usual
procedure of •building an answer to that question into my
definition and then ·triumphantly· •extracting it again by
‘argument’! I’ll show later on that the conditions I have laid
down abundantly prove that the substances are contingent.
II. Form, which consists in the co-ordination of substances—
not in the subordination of them. Co-ordinates are mutually
related as complements forming a whole; subordinates are
related as •cause and effect or more generally as •ground
and consequent. Co-ordination is reciprocal, and the same
names are used for each of the related items—each of them
refers to the other as determining it and being determined
by it. In subordination the names are different for the two related items—one is spoken of purely in terms of •dependency,
the other purely in terms of •causality. This co-ordination is
conceived as real and objective, not as ideal and subjective,
arising from someone’s arbitrarily choosing to think of some
aggregate as a whole. By embracing a plurality ·in your
thought· you can easily fashion a representation-of-a-whole,
but it won’t be a representation of an ·actual objective· whole.
The difference I am talking about is that between
(a) a genuine objective world: an aggregate of substances
that are held together by bonds of transeunt [see
Glossary] causation linking them with one another, and
(b) an aggregate of substances whose togetherness consists only in their being forced together by a unifying
act of thought.
[Kant speaks of (b) as involving a plurality of worlds held together in a
single thought, but that must have been a slip of the pen.] Let’s be
clear about (a): what constitutes the essential form of a
world—the fact about it that is absolutely required for it
to be a world—is not any set of facts about how transeunt
causation plays out among the world’s parts. Those facts
are all contingent; they concern what state the world is
in, but are irrelevant to its status as a world. [The bold type
of this next bit is explained in the note at the top of page 1.] What’s
essential to the world qua world is there being some principle
[see Glossary] that makes it possible for there to be transeunt
causation among these substances—possible for these substances, though independent of one another so far as their
•existence is concerned, to depend on one another for the
•states they are in. Without such a principle, there couldn’t
be transeunt force in the world.
Because this form is essential to a world ·that has it·,
it can’t be changed in any way. ·There are two reasons for
this·. (i) it is secured by logic. In every change, some one
thing goes from being F to being G. Note the need for a
single thing to continue through the change. It’s the same
with the world: through all its successive states it remains
3  
the same world, and must therefore keep the same basic
·essential· form. (Don’t think it could remain the same just
by the continuing existence of its parts; its identity requires
that it keep the same characteristic composition.) Also (ii) if
a world’s essence could change, that would mean that the
basic internal principle of all the changes that occur in it
would be opposed to itself, ·which is impossible·. . . . [Point (ii)
is a striking echo of proposition 4 in Part III of Spinoza’s Ethics.]
Those who see no need for this ·kind of· investigation
have been led astray by the concepts of space and time.
They see space and time as basic,. . . .and as sufficient—all
by themselves, without any other principle entering the
picture—to make it not merely •possible but •necessary for
a number of existing things to be inter-related as parts
constituting a whole. I’ll show later that these notions ·of
space and time· don’t come from reason, and are ideas not of
any •objectively real connections but of •phenomena. They
do indeed tell us that there is some common principle holding
everything together, but they don’t show us what it is.
III. Allness, i.e. containing absolutely all the component
parts. There’s a notion of relative allness [see Glossary] that
we can apply to anything that has parts, even if it is itself
a part of something bigger, e.g. thinking about all the parts
of the Rock of Gibraltar. But when allness is applied to a
world, the thought is of all things whatsoever. This absolute
allness, though it looks like an everyday concept that it’s
easy to understand,. . . .turns out on investigation to present
the philosopher with a crucial problem. It’s hard to conceive
how the the universe’s never-to-be completed series of states,
running on to eternity, can be brought together into a whole
that includes absolutely all changes. Indeed it follows from
its very infinity that the series has no stopping-point; so no
strung-out series of events can be given except as part of a
further series. It follows that there’s no place here for all-in
completeness, absolute totality. We can have the thought
a single series containing all the things that are parts
of anything,
but the concept of a whole—·as distinct from the mere
abstract concept of all·–seems to demand that all those
things should be taken simultaneously; and in the present
case that’s impossible. . . .
You might think that the obstacle to the thought of
a whole infinite series of items strung out through time
doesn’t arise in the case of a simultaneous infinite, because
that involves only the notion of all things at a single time.
But ·that is not right·. The simultaneous infinite and the
successive infinite stand or fall together. [Kant’s given reason
for this amounts to saying: We can’t make sense of ‘an
infinity of cubic yards of space right now’ if we can’t—and
we can’t—make sense of the idea of tagging them all one by
one. He continues:] The laying-out of a plurality—whether
successive or simultaneous—rests on concepts of time. If
you are looking for a way out of this thorny problem, bear in
mind that it’s not a problem about the intellectual concept of
whole, but only about the conditions of sensitive intuition. . . .
4  
Section II: The distinction between sensible things and intelligible things in general
3. Your sensibility is your receptivity, ·your ability to be
on the receiving end·, through which your mind can be
affected in a certain way by the presence of some object.
Your intelligence or rationality is the faculty through which
you can represent things that aren’t of a kind that can
come before your senses. The object of sensibility is the
sensible; anything that can’t be known [see Glossary] except
through intelligence is intelligible. The ancient philosophers
called a sensible thing a phenomenon and an intelligible
thing a noumenon. Knowledge that is subject to the laws of
sensuality is sensitive; in so far as it is subject to the laws of
intelligence it is intellectual or rational [see Glossary].
4. Thus, the sensitive element in knowledge depends on
your special character—on your being able to be changed by
the presence of objects, and on what objects produce what
changes in you. But any knowledge that isn’t affected by
such subjective conditions—·i.e. that doesn’t vary according
to what state you are in·—is ·entirely objective, meaning that
it is· strictly and solely concerned with the object, ·i.e. whatever it is that the knowledge is knowledge about·. This shows
us that what come to us sensitively are representations of
things •as they appear, and what we get in the intellectual
way are representations of things •as they are.
A sensory representation involves (1) something we could
call its matter, namely the sensation; and also (2) something
we could call its form, namely the way the sensory content is
organised—as effects on the senses always are—by a certain
natural law of the mind. Now, whereas (1) the sensation that
is matter of a sensual representation shows that you are in
the presence of something sensible, its quality—·what it is
like·—depends on facts about you, facts about how you can
be affected by the sensible thing in question. Similarly with
(2) the form of the representation: it indicates something
about the qualities of (and relations among) the sensa—·i.e.
the elements of your sensory state·—but it’s not a sketch or
schema of the object, but only ·the result of· a certain law
implanted [see Glossary] in your mind, a law by which your
mind orders for itself the sensa that come from the presence
of the object.
[The start of the next sentence means
How an object affects your senses isn’t determined by the object’s form
or structure;
but it fits the context better if we suppose that what Kant meant to say
was
How an object affects your senses doesn’t put into your sensory state
anything that mirrors the object’s form or structure;]
so, for the various effects that the object has on your senses
to coalesce into a single over-all representation your mind
has to have a built-in principle [see Glossary] which, operating
by strict innate laws, pulls these items together into a
structured whole.
5. In sensory knowledge, then, we have •matter (i.e. sensation) and •form. It’s because of the element of sensation
that such knowledge counts as ‘sensory’ [sensuales]; and
it’s because of the form that the representations in such
knowledge count as ‘sensitive’ [sensitivae], and would do so
even if no sensation were involved.
Intellectual knowledge involves the mind’s higher faculty—
the intellect—and it’s important to understand that this has
two uses. (a) In the real use of the intellect, the concepts
5  
themselves, whether of things or relations, are given, ·and
the intellect employs them in thoughts about those things or
relations·. (b) In the logical use the intellect isn’t interested in
the source of the concepts; its concern is with the concepts
themselves; it attends to which concepts are subordinated
to which others, and brings them together ·pairwise· to see
which are consistent with which others. The logical use of the
intellect, unlike the real use, is common to all the sciences.
When an item of knowledge has been given—it doesn’t matter
how—the question arises as to how it relates, logically, to
these or those other items of knowledge: is it of the same
kind as them? or is there something about it that pushes
it away from them? The answer may be given immediately
and directly in a •judgement or indirectly through a •chain of
reasoning. [Kant in that sentence connects judgments with
‘distinct knowledge’ and reasoning with ‘adequate knowledge’.
That’s the only occurrence of ‘adequate’ in this dissertation,
and he doesn’t explain it.] Items of sensitive knowledge,
therefore, are subordinated to other such items by the logical
use of the intellect (like subordinating concepts to other
concepts), and phenomena are brought under more general
laws of phenomena.
But please note this: However much ·these· items of
knowledge have been subjected to the operations of the
intellect in its logical use, they are still sensitive. They
have that status because of their origin, not because of any
relations they have to other items of knowledge. Even the
most general empirical laws are still sensible, and so are the
principles of geometry. However much we subject the latter
to the rules of logic in deriving some of them from others, that
doesn’t given them a route out of the ‘sensitive’ class. [Kant
rams this home by building into that sentence •a description
of geometry in terms of ‘principles of sensitive form’ and of
‘determinate relations in space’, and •speaking of geometry as
getting its input from ‘a pure intuition’.] [That last phrase, which
will loom large in the Critique, makes its first (unexplained) appearance
here. It will turn up again in items 12, 15 and 25. Incidentally, in
this context ‘principle’ doesn’t have the older meaning explained in the
Glossary.]
On the sensory or phenomenal side, there’s a distinction to be made: •sensory content that hasn’t yet been
processed by the logical use of the intellect is called appearance; and •the reflexive knowledge that comes from the
intellect’s relating several appearances to one another is
called experience. So the only route from appearance to
experience runs through reflection involving the logical use
of the intellect. The common concepts of experience are
called empirical, and the objects of experience are called
phenomena; the laws of experience and quite generally of
all sensitive knowledge are called laws of phenomena. ·Note
well: quite generally, of all. . . ·: Empirical concepts don’t
become intellectual by being used at ever higher levels of
generality. For an empirical concept there is no escape from
the domain of sensitive knowledge; it will always remain
sensitive, however abstractly it is used.
6. Regarding concepts that are in the strict sense
intellectual—ones involved in the real use of the intellect—
whether they are concepts of objects or of relations ·among
objects· their source is the nature of the intellect; they
haven’t been abstracted from any use of the senses and don’t
contain any form of sensitive knowledge. But ·beware·! The
the word ‘abstracted’ is extremely ambiguous, and it would
be best to cleanse our minds of this ambiguity right away,
so as not to let it mess up our thinking about intellectual
concepts. We must distinguish two different things that
can be meant by calling a concept ‘abstract’. We could
mean that (i) it is an intellectual concept that abstracts
6  
from everything sensitive, i.e. is stripped of, or keeps at a
distance from, everything sensitive; or that (ii) it is a concept
that comes to us through concrete sense-experience and is
abstracted from it. It might be better to call (i) an ‘abstracting’
concept, reserving ‘abstract concept’ for (ii). [Kant doesn’t
do this: ‘abstracting’ occurs just this once. Nor does he again (in this
work) follow his other remark that ‘it is more advisable to call intellectual
concepts “pure ideas”.’]
7. This shows us that it’s wrong to trace the sensitive/intellectual line back to the confused/distinct line. The
latter distinction is a logical one that has nothing to do
with the data ·the intellect works on in drawing things
into· structures. ·The two lines cut across one another·:
something can be sensitive and very distinct, like geometry,
the prime example of sensitive knowledge; or intellectual
and extremely confused, like metaphysics, the organon [see
Glossary] of everything. Everyone knows how much effort
metaphysics puts into dispelling the clouds of confusion
that darken the common intellect, though it often has a
less happy outcome than geometry does. But each of these
bears the marks of its origin: the origin of the first kind
qualifies it to count as ‘sensitive’, however distinct a given
case of it may be; and the origin of the second kind qualifies
it as ‘intellectual’, even if it is confused. As an example
of something that is intellectual and confused, I offer you
moral concepts which ·we all know are confused and which·
are known not by experience but through the pure [see
Glossary] intellect itself. The illustrious Christian Wolff •took
the sensitive/intellectual distinction to be a merely logical
one; this •destroyed the noblest enterprise of antiquity, the
inquiry into the nature of phenomena and noumena, and
•did great harm to philosophy by •turning men’s minds away
from that towards details in logic, often very minor ones.
8. The part of philosophy that contains the first principles
of the use of the pure intellect is metaphysics. If you are to
engage in that, you need first to understand the distinction
between sensitive knowledge and intellectual knowledge, and
that’s what I am presenting to you in this dissertation. Well,
then, empirical principles aren’t to be found in metaphysics,
so the concepts involved in it have to be sought not in the
senses but in the very nature of the pure intellect. They
aren’t •innate concepts that have been in the mind from its
beginning; rather, they have been •acquired along the way.
·But it’s a special kind of acquisition, which goes as follows·.
When your mind has experience, that is because laws that
are implanted in it operate on some sensory appearances;
your mind attends to those operations, and from the laws
at work in them it abstracts the concepts that are involved
in metaphysics. They include the concepts of possibility,
existence, necessity, substance, cause etc., along with their
opposites or correlates. These are never parts of any sensory
representation, so there’s no way they could be abstracted
from any such representation.
9. Intellectual concepts have two functions. (1) In their
controlling role they do the negative job of stopping sensitive
concepts from being applied to noumena. In doing this they
don’t move our knowledge along an inch, but they keep it
safe from infection by errors. (2) These concepts have their
not merely controlling use, in which the general principles of
the pure intellect—the sort that are at work in ontology and
in rational [see Glossary] psychology—generate an exemplar
·or model· which is to serve as standard by which all real
things are to be judged. This is the model of noumenal
perfection; ‘noumenal’ because it’s something that can only
be conceived by the pure intellect. This ‘perfection’ can be
7  
taken in either of two ways, •theoretical and •practical,2 so
there are two models: the theoretical one is the highest being,
GOD; the practical one is MORAL PERFECTION. So moral
philosophy’s role of supplying the first principles of moral
judgement is carried out by pure intellect, and itself belongs
to pure philosophy. Epicurus, who made feelings of pleasure
and unpleasure the standard for moral judgment, is rightly
condemned, along with certain moderns—Shaftesbury and
his supporters—who have partly followed him at a distance.
[In this paragraph, ‘source’ translates principium, perhaps making
this difficult passage a bit less obscure than it would be if ‘principle’ [see
Glossary] were used.] If things that are of a kind K can vary in
how K they are—differ in quantity or degree of Kness—the
notion of maximum Kness is where our thinking starts from
and is the source of our knowledge. The maximum of
perfection is what Plato called an ‘idea’ (as in the case of his
‘Idea of the State’), and what we these days call an ‘ideal’. It’s
the source of everything that belongs to any degree to the
kind K, because the lesser degrees of Kness are supposed to
be determinable only by limiting the maximum. But God, as
the ideal of perfection is the source of knowledge, and at the
same time as really existing it is the source of the coming
into existence of all perfection whatsoever.
10. For us humans intellectual knowledge is symbolic,
coming from an operation with
•universal concepts in the abstract, ·i.e. omitting much
of the detail·,
and not through intuition, i.e. not through
•a singular concept in the concrete, ·i.e. with all the
details that would be true of a singular thing falling
under the concept·.
All our intuition is has a certain form; specifically, everything
of which we have intuitions is in space and time; and
the principle [see Glossary] that brings this about won’t let
your mind get into cognitive contact with anything x that is
spatio-temporal
in an abstract way through general concepts;
the only contact it allows is
immediate, in which the mind confronts x as singular.
Now, it’s only in space and time that anything can be
an object of our senses; so it’s a condition of •sensitive
knowledge and can’t deliver any •intellectual intuition. All
the content of our knowledge comes from the senses, but they
don’t yield any representations through which we could conceive anything noumenal. So our concept of the intelligible
is untouched by anything that human intuition can provide.
Our intuition is always passive: we can have intuitions only
when something affects our senses. But divine intuition
causes its objects and isn’t caused by them; and because
it is independent—·i.e. doesn’t depend on or arise from
anything else·—it is an original ·and not a copy·, and for
that reason perfectly intellectual. [This passage reflects Kant’s
view (perhaps not fully formed at the time this dissertation was written)
that the •sensitive/intellectual line coincides with the •passive/active
line, and that this is more than a mere coincidence.]
11. Although phenomena are really just resemblances
of things and not ideas of them, and although they don’t
represent the intrinsic rock-bottom qualities of objects, our
knowledge of them is indeed genuine knowledge. There are
two reasons for saying this. (a) Their status as sensible, and
thus as being caused, means that they are witnesses to the
presence of an object, ·namely the object that caused them·.
[Kant adds ‘and this is opposed to idealism’; this is the only mention
of idealism in this dissertation.] (b) Think about judgements
2 Theoretical: concerned with how things are. Practical: concerned with how they ought to be.
8  
concerning things known sensitively. The truth of the
judgment x is F consists in the agreement of the predicate
F with x, the subject of the judgment. Now, when x is a
phenomenon, your only hold on it comes from its relation
to your faculty of sensitive knowledge, and the predicate
F—concerning something that is sensitively observable—
comes to you through that same faculty. Thus, clearly, your
representations of subject and predicate arise according to
the same laws, and so provide for perfectly true knowledge.
12. [Kant begins this paragraph with a defeatingly condensed sentence;
what follows, down to and including (iv), gives the sentence’s content—
with no additions, but re-organized.] In addition to •phenomena
that are presented to our •senses, there are items which
(i) don’t come before our senses, and yet
(ii) do belong on the sensitive side of the sensitive/intellectual line;
and they can satisfy both (i) and (ii) because they
(iii) present us with the form (but not the content) of
sensibility.
They satisfy (i) because they present only form, not content;
they satisfy (ii) because what they present the form of is
sensibility. And I express all this by saying that they
(iv) present us with intuitions that are pure, i.e. empty of
sensations.
The phenomena of outer sense are displayed and examined in
•physics, and those of inner sense in empirical •psychology.
But pure intuition (our pure intuition) is not
•a universal or logical concept under which things are
thought, but
•a singular concept in which sensible things are
thought,
and so it contains the concepts of space and time.
[What is at work here is Kant’s three-part thesis that (a) all our intuitions
have imposed on them a certain form; (b) this form has to do with
spatiality (for our outer intuitions) and temporality (for all our intuitions,
inner and outer); and (c) we have to think of these not in terms of
the general concepts of spatiality and temporality but in terms of two
individuals, Space and Time. When we say that all physical objects are
spatial, what we do or should mean is not that they fall under the general
concept of spatiality, but rather that they are all in Space, in that one
great big thing.]
Since space and time have no effect on the qualities of
sensible things, they don’t come into the science except
in quantitative ways—·‘twice as big’, ‘gradually lessening
speed’, ‘instantaneous’, and so on·. Pure mathematics deals
with space in •geometry, and with time in •pure mechanics.
There’s also the concept of number, which arithmetic deals
with. It is an intellectual concept, but it can be applied to
concrete situations only in harness with the notions of time
and space: for example,
•with time: counting the rotations of the earth around
the sun;
•with space: counting the planets.
Thus, pure mathematics deals with the form of all our sensitive knowledge, which makes it the organon [see Glossary] of all
knowledge that is both intuitive and clear. And because its
objects—·space and time·—are not only the formal principles
of every intuition but are themselves original intuitions, it
provides us with entirely genuine knowledge while also giving
us a model of the highest kind of certainty in other fields. So
there is a science of sensible things—·meaning ‘science in
its stiffest and most demanding sense·—although intellect
comes into it only in a •logical role, not in a •real role of
adding to the content of the science [see page 5]. . . .
9  
Section III: The principles of the form of the sensible world
13. [Two important preliminaries: •Before reading another word of
Kant’s, go back to the Glossary and remind yourself of what ‘principle’
means in this work. •Latin does not distinguish ‘the principle’ and ‘the
form’ from ‘a principle’ and ‘a form’. This paragraph offers no basis for
a consistent choice, and the present version will push along as best it
can.] The principle of the form of the universe is whatever it
is that contains the basis for the universal connectedness
by which all substances and their states belong to a single
whole—what we call ‘a world’. The principle of the form of
the sensible world is whatever it is that contains the basis
for the universal bond of all phenomena. [What Kant wrote
strictly means ‘. . . of all things insofar as they are phenomena’.] The
form of the intelligible world proclaims an objective principle,
i.e. some cause of the binding together of all ·noumena, i.e.·
things that exist in themselves. But the only principle of form
that is proclaimed by the world considered as phenomenal,
i.e. in relation to the sensuality of the human mind, is a
subjective one, i.e. a law of the mind which necessitates this:
All the things that can be objects of the senses are
seen as belonging to the same whole.
So we know this: the principle of the form of the sensible
world, whatever it is, applies only to things whose actuality
consists in their being capable of falling under the senses.
Its range, therefore, doesn’t include immaterial substances,
which are by definition entirely out of the reach of the external senses. . . . Nor can the cause of the world be an object of
the senses. The principles that give the phenomenal universe
its form are absolutely basic and universal; they—·or rather
the forms that they create·—are as it were tests that any
sensible element in human knowledge has to pass. I shall
now show that there are exactly two of them, space and time.
14. Time
(1) The idea of time doesn’t come from the senses but is
presupposed by them: it’s only through the idea of time that
the things encountered by the senses can be represented
as being simultaneous or successive, so don’t think that
succession generates the concept of time! When time is
defined in terms of a series of actual events happening one
after another, that’s a very poor account of it. That little
word ‘after’—how am I to understand that if I don’t already
have the concept of time?. . . .
(ii) The idea of time is singular, not general. We never
think of ‘a time’ except as a part of the one boundless Time.
If you think of two years, you have to represent them to
yourself as having a determinate position in relation to
each other, and if neither follows the other immediately
you have to think of them as linked by some intermediate
time. Of two different times, which is earlier and which
later can’t be defined by any marks conceivable to the
intellect; the attempt to do so would land you in a vicious
circle. The only way the mind can see the earlier and later
distinction is by a singular intuition. [Kant doesn’t explain
why there’s a threat of vicious circle here. His remark about ‘a singular
intuition’ is also pretty brief; but it is expounded more fully in section 4
of www.earlymoderntexts.com/jfb/time.pdf.] Also—·returning now
to the main thesis of this paragraph·—we conceive of all
actual things as situated in time and not as contained under
its general notion as though being-in-time was a general
characteristic that they all share.
(iii) So the idea of time is an intuition. The conception
of it comes before every sensation, as a pre-requirement for
the relations that hold among sensible things; from which it
10  
follows that it’s a pure intuition, not a sensual one.
(iv) Time is a continuous quantum and is the principle of
the laws of continuous change in the universe. A quantum
is continuous if it isn’t made up of simple parts, and that’s
the case with time. ·Here is an argument which shows this·.
•When you think about time you’re thinking only of
•relations, not of things or events that are thus related.
And so
•in time as a quantum there is compositeness, but
if you think of this compositeness as completely removed then there’s nothing left; and
•if there’s nothing left of a composite x when all compositeness is removed, then x isn’t composed of simple
parts [because otherwise they would be left].
Q.e.d. So every part of time is itself ·a period of· time. Time
does involve items that are simple, namely instants; but they
aren’t •periods of time; they are •boundaries between periods
of time. . . .
The metaphysical law of continuity says that all changes
are continuous. Something cannot go from being F to being
G (where these are mutually inconsistent) except through
an intermediate series of different states. For two opposite
states are at different instants of time, but between the two
instants there would always be some intervening time and
in the infinite series of moments of that time the substance
is not either F or G and yet it is not in no state! So the
substance will be in states other than F and G, and between
any two of those states there will be intervening states,
and so on ad infinitum. The conclusion, then, is that the
change from F to G—·which is a stand-in for any change
whatsoever·—is continuous.
[Kant now has a paragraph reporting a thoughtexperiment by which ‘the celebrated Kaestner’ explored
Leibniz’s thesis that all change is continuous. It has to
do with the movement of a point through an angle, and
concludes that if all change is continuous then a body can
change direction only in a curve. The argument turns on
how •the last instant when the point is moving into the angle
relates to •the first instant when it is moving out of the angle;
but if time is continuous there are no such two instants, and
the argument collapses.]
(v) Time is not something •objective and real, not a substance or accident [see Glossary] or relation; rather, it is a
condition that has to be satisfied if sensible things are to
be inter-related by fixed laws. It’s the nature of the human
mind that sets this condition, so it is •subjective. It is a pure
intuition. [This indented passage is an addition to what Kant wrote.]
It’s an intuition because it is tied in with sensibility;
it is something we confront in our experience, not
something abstract and intellectual. And it is pure
because it doesn’t have any empirical content; it is the
required background against which, or frame within
which, empirical content reaches us.
It’s only through the concept of time that we co-ordinate substances and accidents as being simultaneous or successive;
and so the notion of time, as being what gives form to our
sensory intake, is prior to the concepts of substance and
accident. . . .
Those who assert the objective reality of time go in one
of two ways. (a) English philosophers, especially, think of
time as some continuous flux that exists but doesn’t involve
any ·other· real things—a preposterous view! (b) Leibniz and
his followers think of time as something real, abstracted
from the succession of internal states. The falsity of this
can be seen in •the vicious circle in the definition of time
11  
·that it requires·, and •in its not being able to deal with
simultaneity, which is a very important aspect of time.3 So
it upsets he whole use of sound reason, because instead of
requiring the laws of motion to be defined in terms of time,
it tries to define time itself in terms of observed motions or
series of internal changes. . . . It’s true that we can’t estimate
the length of any period of time except in concrete terms
of amounts of motion or of series of thoughts; but this is
because the concept of time rests only on an internal law
of the mind; it’s not a certain intuition born with us; so
the mind’s action in co-ordinating its own sensa is called
forth only with the help of the senses. If you think you
might be able to explain the concept of time with the help
of reason, you couldn’t be more wrong! The fact is that
even the principle of non-contradiction essentially involves
time. . . . For ‘. . . is F’ is inconsistent with ‘. . . is not F’ only if
they are thought simultaneously (i.e. at the same time) about
the same thing. They can be true of one thing at different
times. Summing up: it is only in time that the possibility
of changes is thinkable: time is not thinkable because of
changes—changes are thinkable because of time.
(vi) Time posited in itself and absolutely would be an
imaginary entity, but because it is related to the immutable
law of sensible things it is a quite genuine concept and a condition of intuitive representation extending over the infinite
range of possible objects of the senses. Because •pairs of
things can’t come before the senses as simultaneous without
the help of time, and •changes are thinkable only through
time, we can see that this concept contains the universal
form of phenomena. So it’s clear that all observable events in
the world, all movements and all internal happenings must
square with any axioms that can be known about time (I
have already expounded some). . . . It is absurd to call on
reason to challenge the first postulates of pure time, such
as the continuity one; because those postulates follow from
laws that are as basic as laws can be. The concept of time is
so basic and independent that reason itself has to have its
help—in formulating the principle of non-contradiction.
(vii) Thus time is an absolutely primary formal principle
of the sensible world. For things that are in any way sensible
have to be thought of as either simultaneous or temporally
successive, and so as inter-related by their determinate
positions in a single time-series. So this concept, which
underlies everything sensitive, gives rise to a •formal whole
that isn’t a part of anything else—i.e. it gives rise to •the
phenomenal world.
15. Space
(A) The concept of space is not abstracted from external sensations. I can’t conceive of something x as located outside
something else y except by locating them in different places
in space—and this includes the case where y is myself. So the
possibility of external perceptions •presupposes the concept
of space, and doesn’t •create it. Thing in space affect the
senses, but space itself can’t be derived from the senses.
(B) The concept of space is a singular representation including all ·spaces· within itself, not an abstract concept that
3 Two items aren’t made to be simultaneous just by not being successive. Take away successiveness and you do indeed abolish a relation that existed
because of the series of time, but that doesn’t automatically create another true relationship, like simultaneity. Simultaneous things are connected
at the same instant just as successive things are connected across different instants. Time has only one dimension only; but what Newton called
its ubiquity [see Glossary]. . . .adds a further dimension to the quantity of actual things which hang, as it were, upon the same point of time. If you
represent time by a straight line produced to infinity, and represent simultaneous things at any temporal point by lines joining at right angles, the
surface which is thus generated will represent the phenomenal world, both as to its substances and as to its accidents.
12  
applies to them all. When you speak of ‘different spaces’ you
have to be referring to different parts of a single boundless
space, each having a fixed position within it. And you can’t
conceive of a cubic foot except as bounded and surrounded
by space.
(C) The concept of space is therefore a pure intuition. ·It is
an intuition· because it is a singular concept; ·and it is pure
because· it is not constructed out of sensations but is the
basic form of all external sensation. It’s easy to notice this
pure intuition in the axioms of geometry, and in any mental
construction of ·geometrical· postulates or problems. Such
truths as these—
•Space has only three dimensions.
•Between two points there is only one straight line.
•From a given point on a plane surface a circle can be
described with a given straight line ·as radius·.
—can’t be inferred from any universal notion of space, but
can only be seen in space itself as in something concrete.
However smart we are, we can’t deploy general concepts
to distinguish •things in a given space that lie towards
one quarter and •things that incline towards the opposite
quarter—e.g. a left had and a perfectly matching right hand.
Two such hands are solids that are perfectly similar and
equal but not congruent. [These days such pairs of things are
called ‘incongruous counterparts’. For a fairly full discussion of them
you might try www.earlymoderntexts.com/jfb/drl.pdf.] Another example would be a pair of spherical triangles from opposite
hemispheres of a single globe; between these (·as between
the matching hands·) there’s a difference which
•makes it impossible for their boundaries to coincide
in space [they are incongruous] , but
•cannot be expressed in general conceptual terms that
would make the difference intelligible in thought and
speech [they are counterparts].
In these cases, therefore, the diversity—i.e. the incongruity—
can be seen only by a certain act of pure intuition.
Hence geometry uses unquestioned principles that are
stated in general conceptual terms and come directly before
the gaze of the mind. Demonstrations in geometry are more
evident than demonstrations in anything else; indeed those
are the only evident demonstrations in the pure sciences;
and their evidentness is the model for, and the means of attaining, evident results in other sciences. . . . ·The ‘means of
attaining’? Yes·, because geometry studies spatial relations,
and the concept of space contains in itself the very form of
all sensual intuition; so nothing can be clear and evident
in things perceived by the outer senses unless it comes
through the intuition which is geometry’s subject-matter.
But geometry doesn’t get its results •by thinking things
through with universal concepts (as we do in sciences based
on reason), but •by subjecting them to the eyes by means of
a singular intuition (as we do in sensitive investigations).4
(D) Space is not something objective and real—not a substance or accident or relation—but is subjective and ideal:
it comes from the nature of the mind by an unchanging
law, as a schema—·a model or template·—for co-ordinating
4 It’s easy to prove that space must be conceived of as a continuous quantity, and I shan’t go into that here. Because it is continuous, ·any portion of
space must be composed of smaller portions, and therefore can’t be ‘simple’ in the sense of not having parts; from which it follows that· the only simple
items in space are not portions of space but limits. . . . A space that isn’t the limit of another space is complete, i.e. is solid ·= three-dimensional’·.
The limit of a solid is a surface, the limit of a surface is a line, the limit of a line is a point. So there are three sorts of limits in space, just as there
are three dimensions. Two of these limits (surface and line) are themselves spaces. Space and time are the only quantas to which the concept of a
limit applies.
13  
externally sensed things with each other. Those who defend
the reality of space fall into two groups:
(i) Most geometers, taking their lead from the English
philosophers, conceive of space as an absolute and
unlimited receptacle of possible things; and
(ii) Most German philosophers, taking their lead from
Leibniz, hold that space is a relation—·or more accurately a system of relations·—that holds amongst
existing things, a system that can be thought only
among actual things and would vanish entirely if the
things were annihilated.
Opting for (i) is accepting an empty figment of reason—
entering the world of fables—in which there’s an infinity
of genuine relations but no entities to be inter-related! [Kant’s
point is presumably this: If space is an infinite container, it must contain
spherical portions, cubic portions, etc.; these involve relations amongst
the parts of space; and according to (i) this would all be the case even if
space were an empty container.] ·Bad as this is, it’s not the worst
mistake one could make.· The followers of (i) merely put a
stumbling block in the way of certain concepts—rational
ones, concerning noumena—which are in any case enormously difficult to get an intellectual grip on (e.g. in questions
about the spiritual world, about omnipresence, and so on).
The error of those who choose (ii) is much worse than that.
They flatly oppose the •phenomena themselves and •the most
faithful interpreter of all phenomena, geometry. Even apart
from the obvious circle in the definition of space that they
are entangled in, they pull geometry down from the summit
of certitude into the ranks of empirical sciences. For if all
the affections [see Glossary] of space are merely borrowed by
experience from external relations, the axioms of geometry
are only comparatively universal; they have the kind of
‘necessity’ that is acquired through induction and doesn’t
extend further than observation goes. Their only necessity
comes from stable laws of nature; their only precision comes
from conventions that we have chosen; and like anything
empirical they open the door to the possibility of some day
discovering a space with different basic affections—perhaps
even a space in which two straight lines can meet twice.
(E) Although the concept of space as some objective and real
entity or affection is imaginary, nevertheless in relation to all
sensible things it is not only utterly true but is also the basis
for all truth in the outer sensible world. Things can’t appear
to the senses in any way except through a power of the mind
that coordinates all sensations according to a stable law
implanted in its own nature. So nothing—nothing—can be
given to the senses that doesn’t conform to •the primitive
axioms of space and the consequences geometry draws from
them, despite the fact that the principle [see Glossary] of those
axioms is only subjective. The laws of sensibility will be
the laws of nature insofar as nature can come before the
senses; to achieve this, all •the principle has to do is to
harmonize with itself! Thus, nature strictly conforms to
what geometry says about the affections of space—I mean,
to what geometry •demonstrates, to hypotheses that are not
merely •invented [ficta] but are given [data] intuitively as the
subjective condition of all the natural phenomena that can be
reached by the ·outer· senses. If the concept of space hadn’t
been given originally by the nature of the mind. . . ., then
the use of geometry in natural philosophy would be quite
unsafe. Why? Because then it could be doubted whether
this empirically based notion of space was a good fit with
nature—the empirical reports on which it was based might
be denied (some people indeed have had suspicions about
this). So space is the formal principle of the sensible world,
and is absolutely basic, partly •because it’s only through the
concept of space that there can be phenomena, but primarily
•because it’s of the essence of space that it is single—·a
14  
single great big item that we ought to call Space·—so that it
embraces absolutely all outer sensible things, which means
that it
how the sentence ends: principium constituit universitatis,
h.e. totius quod non potest esse pars alterius.
conservatively translated: constitutes a principle of universality, i.e. of a whole that can’t be a part of another whole.
and meaning something like this: acts as the source of
wholeness, i.e. brings it about that there is such a thing
as the external world, the assemblage of external things that
isn’t a part of any other assemblage.
[See the explanation of ‘world’ at the start of this work.]
Corollary
These, then, are the two principles of sensitive knowledge;
they aren’t general •concepts such as come into play in
intellectual matters, but singular •intuitions whose status
as intuitions doesn’t stop them from being pure. The laws
of reason ·in intellectual matters· teach that what makes a
composite thing possible are its parts, especially its simple
parts; but when we move across from intellectual matters
to sensitive intuition, the story changes: it is the infinite
whole that makes possible each thinkable part, right down
to the simple ones (which aren’t parts but limits). To mark
off any definite space or time by assigning its limits you
have to start with infinite space and infinite time within
which the smaller spaces or times are marked off. And the
markers—the point and the instant—are conceivable only as
limits within a space and time that is already given. So all
the basic properties of these concepts lie outside the domain
of reason and therefore can’t be explained in intellectual
terms. Still, they are what the intellect works with when with
perfect confidence it uses logical laws to draw conclusions
from primary data of intuition.
. . . .·The concept of· space is applied as an image to the
concept of time, representing time by a line and its limits
(instants) by points. Time. . . .embraces with its own relations
absolutely all things—space itself and ·the whole contents
of space·; and also thoughts, which aren’t spatially related
to anything. Although time doesn’t dictate laws to reason, it
does create the conditions in which the mind can inter-relate
its own notions in accordance with the laws of reason. To
judge that something is impossible, I have to see that it
predicates both A and not-A of the same subject at the
same time. And—above all—if we’re applying our intellect to
experience, we need time-relations to help us determine what
is earlier and what later, and thus what causes and what is
caused; and to do that for external causes and effects we also
need spatial relations. And we can’t have any thoughts about
spatial quantities—·distances, areas, volumes, etc.·—unless
we do it by applying numbers to some chosen unit. And
numbers exist only because there are aggregates that are
distinctly known by enumeration, i.e. by successively adding
one to one—a process that happens in time.
A question that arises insistently for everyone is this: Is
the concept of space (time) •born with us or •acquired. The
answer ‘acquired’ seems to have refuted by the things I have
demonstrated; but let us not casually opt for ‘born with us’,
because that opens up a path towards the lazy philosophy
that keeps saying ’It’s no use exploring further’. And, anyway,
the concepts of space and time certainly have been acquired,
not by
•abstraction from the sensing of objects (for sensation
gives the •matter and not the •form of human knowledge), but
•from the mind’s action of co-ordinating its sensa
according to permanent laws.
Each of these two concepts is like a fixed plan or diagram
15  
that is to be known intuitively. Sensations arouse this act
of the mind—·this intuition·—but they don’t influence the
·content of the· intuition. In all this the only thing that is
born with us is the law of the mind that makes it combine in
a fixed manner the sensa produced in it by the presence of
an object.
Section IV: The principle of the form of the intelligible world
16. Those who take space and time to be a real and
absolutely necessary fastening, so to speak, of all possible
substances and states think that that’s all they need to
conceive how it can be that
a certain basic relation applies to an assemblage of
existing things, functioning as •the ultimate source of
their ability to act on one another and as •the principle
of the essential form of the universe.
They think that existing things must be somewhere, so they
don’t see any need to enquire why these things turn up in
regular ways, because they think that that’s produced by
the space that holds them all. But I have shown that this
concept has to do with sensitive laws of the •subject rather
than with the conditions of the •objects themselves. . . . So
these people don’t touch the question that still confronts us
and that can only be answered by the intellect:
What is the principle that gives rise to this relation
of all substances—this relation which when seen
intuitively is called space?
Thus the question about the principle of the form of the intelligible world requires us to make clear what enables many
substances to interact in such a way as to belong to a single
whole that is called ‘a world’. [The note at the top of page 1 explains
the bold type.] This isn’t about a world’s matter, i.e. what sorts
of substances it contains, but about its form, i.e. that is how
it comes about that many substances are inter-linked so
that they all constitute a single whole.
17. The sheer existence of a lot of substances doesn’t by
itself make them able to interact. For their interaction to be
intelligible, something more is required. The sheer fact that
a substance exists doesn’t necessarily relate it to anything
else (except perhaps to its cause, but the relation of caused
to cause is ·one-way· dependence, whereas we’re concerned
here with ·two-way· interaction). . . .
[Kant now drags in a mention of ‘the doctrine of “physical
influence” in the plain man’s sense of that phrase’, and kicks
it around in a very obscure manner. This dark paragraph
doesn’t purport to contribute to anything that follows it, so
we can let ourselves off from wrestling with it. The phrase
influxus physicus will recur (twice) in 22 but nowhere else.]
18. It’s impossible for two or more necessarily existing
substances to constitute a single whole. No such substance
depends on anything else for its existence; so it is clear that
we have not only this result ·from 17 above·:
16  
the interaction of substances (i.e. the two-way dependence of their states) doesn’t follow from their mere
existence,
but also this one:
interaction can’t be attributed at all to substances that
are necessary things.
[Kant seems here to ignore the distinction that he stressed back on
page 3, where he clearly implied that substances might be ‘independent
of one another so far as their •existence is concerned’ yet ‘depend on one
another for the •states they are in’. It’s bewildering. If you want to check
on this yourself, the Latin and two previous translations can be found on
page 26.]
19. Thus a whole of substances is a whole of contingents,
·i.e. things that exist contingently, not necessarily·. It’s an
essential fact about any world that it is composed of mere
contingents. The only way a necessary substance could
be ·causally· linked with a world is by being its cause. It
can’t be linked as a part, for that would involve its being
involved in two-way inter-dependence with the other parts,
and that’s ruled out for a necessary entity. Therefore the
cause of the world—·if it has a cause·—is right outside the
world; so it isn’t the soul of the world, ·as various religions
and philosophies have thought it to be·. And its presence
in the world is not local but virtual. [In a Note at the end of
this Section Kant will flesh out that last sentence: the cause of the world
isn’t in the world by being somewhere in it or everywhere in it, but by
being inwardly present to things, thus making it possible for them to be
spatially related to one another.]
20. Substances that are in the world derive from something other than themselves; but not from several such
somethings—they all derive from one entity. If they were
caused by several necessary beings, they couldn’t interact
with one another because their different causes couldn’t.
Thus, what makes the substances in the universe hang
together as one world is a consequence of their all coming
from one cause. . . . And there can’t be an architect of the
world who isn’t also its creator.
21. If there were several first and necessary causes, and
things caused by them, the upshot would be worlds, not a
world, because the things wouldn’t all be inter-connected in
such a way as to constitute a single whole. And conversely if
there were several non-overlapping worlds, they would have
to come from several first and necessary causes; the lack of
interaction between any two of the worlds would result from
the lack of interaction between the respective world-causes.
So it’s not the case (as Wolff thought it is . . . .) that the
very concept of world makes it impossible that there should
two or more non-overlapping actual worlds. All we can say
about the possibility of several worlds is that if there’s only
one necessary cause of everything there can’t be more than
one world. If there is more than one necessary cause, it will
be possible—in the strictest metaphysical sense—for there
to be that many non-overlapping worlds.
22. From the existence of a world we can validly infer that
there’s a single cause of all its parts; if it’s also valid to infer,
in the opposite direction, from their having a single common
cause that they are interconnected, this being the form of
the world (though I admit this second inference doesn’t seem
to me as clear the first), then the fundamental interlinking of
substances would be not contingent but necessary because
they would all be sustained by a common principle. This
interlinking would create a •harmony •coming from the sheer
fact of their existence, •based on their common cause, and
•unrolling according to common rules. I call this kind of
17  
harmony a generally established harmony; it is real, out
there in the world. It contrasts with specially established
harmony, which occurs only because individual states of
each substance are correlated with the individual states of
the others; this being ideal and sympathetic [see Glossary].
[The rest of this paragraph re-arranges what Kant wrote in ways that
can’t easily by indicated by dots, brackets, etc., but it doesn’t change the
content in any way.] So all harmony among the substances in
the universe is established externally (through the common
cause of all of them) and is either
(1) established generally by physical influence (in its more
correct form [see the second half of 17]) or
(2) established for the states of the substances individually.
And (2) has two versions:
(2a) The harmony is grounded in the basic constitutions
of the substances; this is pre-established harmony;
(2b) The harmony consists in the fact that the various
individual changes of state of each substance are
matched by changes in other substances; this is called
occasionalism.
Let us focus on these two propositions:
(i) All substances are sustained by one being, i.e. all have
a single common cause.
(ii) The harmony amongst all substances is necessary.
If (i) implies (ii) then there will be universal interaction among
the substances—interaction through physical influence—
and the world will be a real whole. But if (i) doesn’t imply
(ii) then the ‘interaction’ will be sympathetic (i.e. harmony
without true interaction)—and the world will only be an ideal
whole. In my view, although it hasn’t been demonstrated that
(i) implies (ii), there are plenty of reasons to favour the first
view, namely that the harmony among substances reflects
real causal interactions and the world is a real whole.
* * * * *
Note: If it were legitimate to take a small step beyond the
boundaries of the absolute certainty that is appropriate to
metaphysics, we might investigate certain questions not
only about the •laws of sensitive intuition but also about
its •causes, which can be known only through the intellect.
It’s only because the human mind is sustained by the same
infinite power as sustains everything else that •it is affected
by external things and •the world lies open to its view in
infinitum. So the mind only senses external things through
the presence of that common sustaining cause. And so space,
which is the sensitively known universal and necessary
condition of the co-presence of all things, can be called
phenomenal omnipresence. (What makes the cause of the
universe present to all individual things is not its being
in the places where they are. It is present inwardly to all
things; and if it weren’t there wouldn’t be any places, i.e. any
possible ·spatial· relations among substances.)
·That’s one result that intellect can—at least tentatively—
achieve concerning the causes of sensitive intuition. Here’s
another·. The possibility of changes and successions—the
principle of which, so far as it is sensitively known, resides
in the concept of time—presupposes a thing that changes,
i.e. stays in existence while its opposed states follow in
succession; and this can’t happen unless the changing thing
is sustained by something else. And so the concept of time,
as a unique and unchangeable5 infinite in which all things
5
·‘Unchangeable? Don’t we experience the flow of time?’ No!· We don’t experience moments of time succeeding one another, because that would
require a second time in which this succession occurred. The appearance that sensitive intuition presents us with is of events flowing towards us
down the continuous and unchanging channel, so to speak, of moments.
18  
exist and stay in existence, is the phenomenal eternity of the
general cause.
But it seems wiser to keep close to the shore of the
knowledge granted to us by the mediocrity of our intellect,
rather than setting sail into the deep sea of mystical inquiries,
as Malebranche did. ·I mention him· because his view that
we see all things in God is close to the opinions I have
presented in this Note.
Section V: The method of dealing with the sensitive and the intellectual in metaphysics
23. In all sciences whose principles are given intuitively,
either •by sensual intuition (experience), i.e. natural science,
or •by intuition that is sensitive but pure (the concepts of
space, time and number), i.e. mathematics, practice gives
rise to method. When a science has achieved a certain
comprehensiveness and orderliness, then it can become
clear through trial-and-outcome what direction and what
procedures we should take so as to bring it to completion, purifying it by scrubbing off the stains of mistakes and confused
thoughts. That’s what grammar did: after abundant uses
of speech it had a basis for rules and training; and elegant
examples of poems and orations provided a basis for rules
of style. But in sciences of this kind, whose basic concepts
and axioms are given by sensitive intuition, the only use for
intellect is logical—i.e. subordinating items of knowledge to
one another, steering by the principle of non-contradiction:
for example, subordinating phenomena to more general
phenomena, and subordinating the conclusions of pure
intuition to the intuitive axioms.
In pure philosophy—which is what metaphysics is—the
basic concepts and axioms themselves are first given by the
pure intellect itself; so they don’t have the immunity to error
that intuitions have, ·which means that metaphysics doesn’t
have such immunity either, so that here· method comes before all science; and if you try to achieve anything before the
precepts of this method have been properly hammered out
and firmly established, your attempt will be seen as rashly
conceived, an empty plaything of the mind, not acceptable.
[Kant builds into the first sentence of this paragraph a clause
equating ‘the basic concepts. . . etc.’ with ‘the use of the
intellect in dealing with principles is real. [For the contrast
between ‘logical’ and ‘real’ uses of the intellect, see the second paragraph
of 5 on page 5.]
In metaphysics the right use of reason •sets up the very
principles themselves and •brings to our attention both the
objects and the axioms that are to be applied to them; so
the very beginning of this science consists in expounding
the laws of pure reason, and and the criterion of truth
·in metaphysics· rests on distinguishing these laws from
fraudulent ones. Apart from the material that logic teaches
generally to all the sciences, the method of metaphysics—the
method that fits its unique character—is not well known
at the present time and may be wholly unknown. So it’s
no wonder that those who have devoted themselves to this
19  
research, unceasingly rolling their stone of Sisyphus [see
Glossary], have so far made almost no progress. This is not
the place to go fully into such a notable and far-ranging
question, and I shan’t do that. But I shall briefly sketch one
important part of this method, namely protecting intellectual
knowledge from contagion by sensitive knowledge. If you
aren’t careful this intruder will creep up on you in your
application of principles, and will even produce spurious
principles in the guise of axioms.
24. In metaphysical matters concerning the sensitive/intellectual line, method boils down to this all-important
rule: take great care not to let the home-grown principles of
sensitive knowledge emigrate and move over into intellectual
affairs. In any intellectually enunciated judgement the
predicate is a condition without which the subject is asserted
to be unthinkable, so the predicate is the source of our
knowledge ·of that subject·. [The first clause in that sentence
may strike you as wild, but consider: If a judgment S is P purports to
be intellectual rather than sensitive, the basis for it can’t be anything
empirical; so it has to be on the intellectual side of the line, i.e. must
concern what is involved in thinking about S; which amounts to interpreting S is P as saying that if you don’t bring P into your thought you
won’t be able to think about S.] Accordingly if the predicate is a
sensitive concept it can’t deliver anything except sensitive
knowledge, so it will properly fit only a judgement-subject
whose concept is likewise sensitive. If it is applied to an
intellectual concept, the resultant judgment will be valid only
according to subjective laws; so it can’t be predicated and
stated objectively concerning the intellectual notion itself.
All it can do is to state a necessary condition of there being
any chance of sensitive knowledge of the given concept.6
My topic here is the metaphysical fallacy of switching [see
Glossary]: it’s the trick the intellect plays when it treats a
sensitive concept as though it were an intellectual one, thus
working a switch. A hybrid axiom—i.e. one that tries to
pass off sensitive wares as being fit for use with intellectual
concepts—is what I call a switching axiom. These spurious
axioms have led to intellectual deceptions that have disastrously permeated the whole of metaphysics. We need a readily available and clearly recognisable criterion, a touchstone,
for distinguishing these judgements from genuine ones; and
if it should happen that such an axiom seems to be firmly
attached to the intellect, we need an assaying technique that
will help us to get an accurate view of much ·of what the
switching axiom says· pertains to the sensitive domain and
how much to the intellectual. To achieve this we must dig.
25. Here then is the principle of reduction [see Glossary] for
any switching axiom:
If something P involving the relations of space and
time is predicated universally of some intellectual
concept S—·‘All S is P’·—this can’t be presenting P as
objectively true ·of S in itself·. All it says is that P is a
condition that must be satisfied if S is to be sensitively
knowable.
6 This provides a fruitful and easy criterion for distinguishing principles that only •state laws of sensitive knowledge from ones that also •teach
something about the objects themselves. If the predicate is an intellectual concept, it applies to the subject itself, no matter how sensitively it is
thought. But if the predicate is a sensitive concept, it won’t be valid of the intellectually thought subject of a judgement; because the laws of sensitive
knowledge are not conditions of the possibility of things themselves. For example, the popular axiom Whatever exists is somewhere fails this test: its
predicate ·‘is somewhere’· contains the conditions of sensitive knowledge, so it can’t be applied generally to the subject of a judgement—i.e. it can’t
be applied to everything that exists. . . . But should the proposition be converted so that the intellectual concept becomes the predicate, it turns out
to be true—namely, the truth that whatever is somewhere exists.
20  
Any such axiom would be spurious and rashly and hazardously asserted, if not outright false. Here is why: since S
is conceived intellectually it pertains to •the object, whereas
P (since it involves space and time) pertains only to •the
conditions of sensitive human knowledge; perhaps that isn’t
the only kind of knowledge; and if it isn’t, then P doesn’t
cover the whole territory and thus doesn’t grip onto S itself.
And the reason why the intellect is so easily subject to this
fallacy of switching is that it is led astray by the authority of
a certain other rule that is utterly genuine:
If something can’t be known by any intuition at all,
that means that it is unthinkable and thus impossible.
Now, we can’t by any effort of the mind •have or even
•imagine any intuition except the one that fits the form of
space and time. So we are led to regard every intuition that
isn’t spatio-temporal—e.g. God’s pure intellectual intuition.
which Plato calls an ‘Idea’—as impossible. And so we subject
all possible things to the sensitive axioms of space and time.
26. [The items in the following three-part classification are the topics
of 27, 28 and 29 respectively. After that, 30 brings the work to a close.]
Switching axioms arise from illusions in which sensitive
cognition masquerades as intellectual knowledge. ·There are
many such illusions, but· they fall into three kinds. Here are
their general formulae:
(1) The sensitive condition that has to be satisfied if it’s
to be possible to have an intuition of an object is also
a necessary condition for the possibility of the object.
(2) The sensitive condition that has to be satisfied if it’s to
be possible to collect and survey facts about an object
so as to form an intellectual concept of it is also a
necessary condition for the possibility of the object.
(3) The sensitive condition that has to be satisfied if
it’s to be possible to bring an object under a given
intellectual concept is also a necessary condition for
the possibility of the object.
27. Here’s a switching axiom of class (1): Whatever exists is
somewhere and somewhen.7 This spurious principle implies
that all entities—even if they were known intellectually—are
bound in their existence by the conditions of space and time.
An upshot of this was that empty questions were bandied
about concerning where in the corporeal universe immaterial
substances are located, where the seat of the soul is, and so
on. (·How did immaterial substances enter the picture·? Well,
they have something in common with intellectual things,
namely that neither is given in sensitive intuition and neither
can be represented in that ·spatial· form; so they are mixed
together—a jumble of immaterial substances and intellectual
items, like a jumble of squares and circles.) These disputes
have been so empty that (as the old saying has it) it often
looked as though one disputant was milking a he-goat while
the other held a sieve underneath. Immaterial things are
virtually present in the corporeal but not locally present, ·i.e.
they are active in the corporeal world but aren’t located in it·.
Now, the only interactions that space allows for is between
material bodies. Then what constitutes the external relations
of forces between immaterial substances, and between them
and bodies, completely escapes the human intellect. . . .
7 Space and time are conceived as embracing everything that meets the senses in any way. The laws of the human mind don’t allow it any intuition
of something not contained in space and time. We can compare this first switching axiom with something that isn’t strictly a switching axiom but
rather a trick of the imagination: Whatever exists has space and time IN it, meaning that every substance is extended and continually changing.
Broad-brush thinkers are tied down by this law of the imagination, but even they easily see that it applies only to the imagination’s efforts give an
outline of the appearance of things, and doesn’t apply to the conditions of existence.
21  
[In a note at the end of the work, Kant remarks that the need for brevity
has led him to say things that might seem rashly dogmatic, and he agrees
that further explanation of some of them should be provided in a context
where no length-limit has been imposed. He cites this present passage
as an example, and offers this explanation:]
The situation is not this:
•Your soul interacts with your body because it is
located in a certain place in your body,
but rather this:
•What gives your soul a determinate place in the
universe is its interaction with your body.
When this interaction is broken off your soul no longer
has a spatial location. So its locatedness is derivative;
it’s something your soul has because a certain condition is
fulfilled; it’s not a basic necessary condition of its existence.
Things that can’t be objects of external senses like those
we humans have—i.e. immaterial things—are absolutely
exempted from •the condition that has to be satisfied by
everything that can be sensed externally, namely •being in
space. So we can deny that the soul is unconditionally and
immediately located, while still attributing to it a conditional
and derivative locatedness.
[And now we return to 27.]
When philosophers come to the concept of a supreme being
outside the world, they are deluded by these shadows that
flit before the intellect; how badly? words fail me! They
make up the story that God is located in space, and they
try to compensate for this limitation on him by conceiving
his location as infinite. But it’s absolutely impossible to be
in several places at once; different places are outside one
another, so something in several places at once would have
to be outside itself and present to itself externally, which is
a contradiction.
What about time? These philosophers don’t merely •cut
time loose from the laws of sensitive knowledge but positively
•transfer it beyond the boundaries of the world to God, who
is outside the world, as a condition of his existence. That
lands them in an insoluble maze in which they torment
their minds with absurd questions, such as ‘Why didn’t
God create the world many centuries earlier than he did?’
They persuade themselves that there’s no problem about
God’s seeing things that are present, but find it hard to
understand how he sees things that haven’t yet happened.
(As if a necessary being exists through time, so that when
some part of his own duration has been lived through he
has to see in advance the eternity that still lies ahead of
him, while also seeing what is happening just then.) All
these problems vanish like smoke when the notion of time is
rightly understood.
28. Preconceptions in class (2) are even more secretive ·in
how they go about ambushing the understanding·. In some
cases the mind can’t reach a certain intellectual concept
except through sensitive conditions, and those conditions
allow the preconceptions to slip through and impose on the
intellect. I’ll present two of these, one concerning knowledge
of quantity, the other concerning knowledge of qualities in
general.
(i) Every actual aggregate is capable of being numbered;
so every quantity is finite.
(ii) Whatever is impossible contradicts itself.
The concept of time doesn’t enter into the notion of either
predicate (·numerable, self-contradictory·), and isn’t considered to be a mark of either subject; but it does in each case
serve as the medium in which the concept of the predicate is
formed. So it affects the intellectual concept of the subject
because it is only with its help—i.e. the help of the notion of
22  
time—that we reach the latter concept.
Let’s start with (i). (a) For any quantity or series to
be known distinctly it must be known through successive
co-ordination; so the intellectual concept of a quantity and an
aggregate can be reached only with the help of this concept of
time; and it never reaches completion unless the synthesis—
·i.e. the one-by-one enumeration·—could be achieved in a
finite time. So an infinite series of co-ordinates is
•not distinctly thinkable by us because of the limits of
our intellect;
but then a switching fallacy enters the picture and has us
concluding that such a series is
•impossible.
(b) The laws of the pure intellect require that every series
of effects has a source, and therefore has a boundary; and
the laws of sensitive knowledge require that every series of
co-ordinate things has an assignable beginning. Of these
two results, the first concerns the dependence of the whole
series, while the second concerns the measurability of the
series; and ·through a switching fallacy· they are wrongly
held to be identical.
(c) Something similar happens with the argument of the
intellect proving that (c1) if there’s a substantial composite
there must be the sources of this, i.e. things that are simple. Something gets added to this—having been secretly
‘switched’ in from sensitive knowledge—namely that the
breaking down of such a composite into its parts wouldn’t
go on to infinity, i.e. that (c2) any composite has a definite
number of parts. This is certainly not a twin of (c1) and
shouldn’t be substituted for it.
So these propositions:
(a1) The quantity of the world is limited (not the highest
quantity);
(b1) The world manifests its cause;
(c1) Bodies consist of simple things;
can be known on the authority of reason, which is perfectly
trustworthy. But these next three propositions:
(a2) The universe in its mass is mathematically finite;
(b2) The age of the universe can be given in terms of units
of measurement;
(c2) There is a definite number of simple things constituting any body;
openly proclaim their origin in the nature of sensitive knowledge; and whatever truth there may be in them they labour
under the undoubted blemish of their origin.
Now for case (ii), ·involving the proposition that Whatever
is impossible contradicts itself. In this case, as with (i),
the concept of time serves as the medium in which the
concept of the predicate (self-contradictory) is formed·. This
second switching axiom arises from recklessly converting the
principle of ·non·-contradiction,
·PNC: Whatever is self-contradictory is impossible·.
The concept of time comes into PNC, which declares the
impossibility of any state of affairs in which contradictory
things are applied to one thing at one time, i.e.
Whatever simultaneously is and is not is impossible.
This is perfectly true and utterly evident, because in it
something is predicated by the •intellect to something that
has been given according to •sensitive laws. But if you
convert this, saying
Everything impossible is-and-isn’t-at-the-same-time,
i.e. involves a contradiction,
you are predicating of an object of reason something involving sensitive knowledge, thus subjecting the intellectual
concept of possible/impossible to the conditions of sensitive
knowledge, namely the relations of time. What you are
saying is perfectly true for the laws by which the human
23  
intellect is constrained and limited, but it doesn’t hold
objectively and generally. Our intellect becomes aware of
an impossibility only when it sees that opposite things are
being simultaneously said about one thing, i.e. only when
there’s a contradiction. When that situation doesn’t arise,
the human intellect has no basis for making any judgement
of impossibility.
·What the ‘switching’ does here is to· treat the subjective
conditions of judging as objective, which is tantamount to
concluding that anything that the human intellect can’t do is
therefore not permitted to any intellect at all. ·By elementary
logic, the proposition formed by converting PNC, i.e. the
bold-type indented one immediately above·, is equivalent to
Whatever doesn’t involve a contradiction is possible.
On the strength of this there has been an explosion of
invented ‘forces’, freed from the obstacle of self-contradiction,
bursting out from people whose minds go in for theoretical
structures (or, perhaps go in for intellectual fantasies). . . .
A falsely fabricated force can be impossible without being
self-contradictory; so it’s wrong to take any ·supposed· basic
force to be possible unless it has been given by experience;
you can’t get there just by sharp thinking.
29. The switching axioms in class (3) (see 26) are like those
in class (2) in this: conditions that belong to a subject are
rashly transferred to objects. But they differ in this: the effect of the switch is that things that are given sensitively—·i.e.
space and time·—are. . .
•(in (2)) . . . our only route to the intellectual concept,.
•(in (3)) . . . needed for us to know whether the intellectual concept can be applied to something given in
experience.
. . . .An example of (3) is the maxim—common in certain
schools—that whatever exists contingently has at some time
not existed. This spurious principle arises from the poverty
of the intellect, which can usually sees the nominal marks
of contingency or necessity but rarely the real ones. ‘Is it
possible for this substance not to exist?’ We aren’t likely to be
able to answer this a priori, ·getting right down to the meat
of the matter·; all we can do is ·superficially· to go by the
fact that at one time the substance didn’t exist. If it didn’t,
then the substance certainly is contingent, The principle
•Whatever doesn’t exist at some time is contingent
is just plain true. . . . But its converse,
•Whatever is contingent is non-existent at some time,
relies on the conditions under which we can see whether
something exists necessarily or contingently. [That’s what Kant
wrote. He should have said ‘. . . under which we can see that something
exists contingently’.] So it should be stated as the subjective law
that it really is:
If there’s no evidence that a certain thing at one time
didn’t exist, common intelligence gives us no basis for
inferring that it is contingent.
This eventually turns into an objective condition, implying
that without sometime-nonexistence there would be no room
for contingency; and that yields a spurious and erroneous
‘axiom’, ·namely:
If a thing has always been in existence, its existence
is not contingent,
This is erroneous·, because this world is sempiternal, i.e.
exists at every time, yet it exists contingently.
30. Closely associated with these switching principles there
are certain others ·that are equally damaging·. These indeed
don’t stain any intellectual concept with a taint of sensitive
knowledge; but they so play upon the intellect that it takes
them for arguments drawn from the object, whereas really we
are drawn to them only by their fit [see Glossary] with the free
24  
and ample use of the intellect. . . . Like the other ·switching·
principles, these rest on subjective grounds, but unlike the
others they don’t draw from the laws of sensitive knowledge;
their source is the laws of intellectual knowledge itself, laws
setting the conditions under which the intellect sees itself as
free and agile and sharp.
Let me end this dissertation with some remarks about
these principles, which have never before been clearly presented, as far as I know. I call them ‘principles of fit’. They
are rules of judgment that we gladly accept and cling to as
though they were axioms, solely because if we don’t follow
them scarcely any judgement about a given object would be
permitted to our intellect. I shall now present three principles
of fit.
(i) All things in the universe happen in accordance with
the order of nature. Epicurus affirmed this without any
restriction; and all philosophers affirm it with one voice,
subject only to very rare exceptions that may have to be
admitted under extreme necessity. [This refers to miracles that
are well-attested and seem not to involve trickery.] But we accept
this not because
•we have so wide a knowledge of the events in the world
according to the common laws of nature,
or because
•we can see that supernatural events are impossible
or very nearly so,
but because
•if we departed from the order of nature we would have
no use at all for the intellect; and the hasty appeal
to supernatural events is the couch on which a lazy
intellect reclines.
For the same reason, we carefully keep fairly miraculous
events out of our accounts of phenomena—I’m talking here
about the influence of minds ·on bodies·. We don’t actually
know what is going on there; so ·if we postulate nearly
miraculous events in which minds influence bodies· we’ll do
ourselves great harm by turning our intellect •away from
the light of experience which provides its only chance of
getting laws of judging and •towards shadows of detachable
properties and causes that are unknown to us.
(ii) Principles are not to be multiplied beyond what is absolutely necessary. This well-known canon expresses the
leaning towards unity which is proper for the philosophical
spirit. We accept this not •because either reason or experience has shown us a causal unity in the world, but because
•our intellect drives us to seek such unity because it thinks
it has succeeded in explaining phenomena only to the extent
that it has been able to bring a very large number of things
under a single principle.
(iii) Nothing material comes into existence or goes out of
existence; the only changes in the world are changes in the
forms ·of things that stay in existence throughout the change·.
This postulate, on the recommendation of the common
intellect, has pervaded all the schools of philosophers; not
•because anyone has thought it to have been taken as discovered or demonstrated by a priori arguments but •because
if matter itself is said to be in flux and transitory nothing
stable and durable will be left which could serve in the
further explanation of phenomena according to universal
and perpetual laws and in this way promote the use of the
intellect.
So much, then, as regards method, especially in reference
to the distinction between sensitive and intellectual knowledge. If it ever happens that a more careful investigation
of this method leads to its being embodies in rules, that
will serve as an introductory science that will be immensely
helpful to anyone planning to penetrate the very recesses of
metaphysics