Preface
I have chosen a projecta which, from the aspect both of its inherent
difficulty and in relation to religion, is capable of influencing the reader
to adopt an unfavourable prejudice from the very beginning. To discover
the system that connects the great parts of creation in the whole extent
of infinity, to derive the formation of the celestial bodies themselves
and the origin of their motion out of the first state of nature through
mechanical laws: insights such as these would appear to go well beyond
the powers of human reason. From the other side, religion threatens us
with a solemn accusation for the audacity with which one might make
so bold as to ascribe to nature, which is left to itself, such consequences
in which one can rightly become aware of the immediate hand of the
highest being, and is concerned to find protection for the atheist in the
forwardness of such observations. I see all these difficulties clearly, and
yet am not faint of heart. I feel all the power of the obstacles in my way
and do not despair. I have dared to undertake a dangerous journey on the
basis of a slight supposition and already see the foothills of new lands.
Those who have the courage to pursue the exploration, will step onto
those lands and have the pleasure of bestowing their own name upon
them.
I did not set out upon this enterprise until I saw myself secure in
relation to the duties of religion. My eagerness was redoubled when I
1:222 saw that with every step the mists dispersed whose darkness seemed to
hide monsters; and after they parted, the glory of the highest being shone
forth with the most vivid brilliance. Since I know these efforts to be free
of all reproach, I will sincerely adduce anything that well-intentioned,
but also weak minds might find offensive in my plan, and am prepared to
submit it to the severity of the orthodox Areopagus7 with the frankness
that is characteristic of an honest disposition. The champion of faith may
nonetheless make his reasons heard first.
If the universeb with all its order and beauty is merely an effect of matter left to its general laws of motion, if the blind mechanism of the powers
of nature knows how to develop so magnificently and to such perfection
all of its own accord: then the proof of the divine Author, which one
derives from the sight of the beauty of the universe, is entirely stripped
of its power, nature is sufficient in itself, divine government is superfluous, Epicure lives again in the middle of Christendom, and an unholy
philosophy tramples faith under foot, which hands that philosophy a
bright light to illuminate it.
a Vorwurf b Weltbau
194
If I had found this objection well-founded, the conviction I have
regarding the infallibility of divine truths is so powerfulc in me that
I would consider everything that contradicts them to be sufficiently
disproved and would reject it. It is, however, precisely the agreement
between my system and religion that raises my confidence to a fearless
serenity in the face of all difficulties.
I am aware of the entire value of those proofs that are adduced from the
beauty and perfect arrangement of the universe to confirm a most wise
Author. If one is not arbitrarily opposed to all convincing arguments,
one must hand the victory to such incontrovertible reasons. I, however,
maintain that the defenders of religion, by using these reasons in a bad
way, will perpetuate the argument with the naturalists,8 offering a weak
flank without any need to do so.
People are accustomed to note and emphasize the harmony, the
beauty, the purposes, and a perfect correspondence of the means to 1:223
them in nature. But, by elevating nature from this perspective, one also
seeks to lower it from another perspective. This harmony, people say,
is foreign to it; left to its own universal laws, nature would bring about
nothing but disorder. These harmonies point to a foreign hand that has
been able to force a wise plan onto matter devoid of all regularity. But I
answer: If the universal laws of causation of matter are also a result of the
highest plan, then they can presumably have no purpose other than that
which strives to fulfil of their own accord that plan which the highest
wisdom has set itself; or, if this is not the case, one ought not to fall into
the temptation of believing that at least matter and its universal laws are
independent and that the wisest power, which has been able to use the
laws in so laudable a fashion, is great yet not infinite, powerful yet not
entirely self-sufficient.
The defender of religion is concerned that those harmonies that can be
explained by a natural tendency of matter can be said to prove the independence of nature from divine providence. He admits it quite clearly:
that if natural causes can be discovered for all the order in the universe
that can be brought about by the most general and most essential properties of matter, then it is not necessary to invoke a highest governing
power. The naturalist finds his satisfaction by not disputing this premise.
But he unearths examples that prove the fruitfulness of the universal laws
of nature by means of perfectly beautiful consequences, and with such
grounds, which could become invincible weapons in his hands, he puts
the orthodox believer into danger. I will quote some examples. It has
frequently been cited as one of the clearest proofs of a beneficent providence watching over human beings that in the hottest regions of the
c
vermogend ¨
195
earth, sea breezes waft across the heated land and refresh it at just the
time when it is most in need of them, almost as though they had been
ordered. For example, on the island of Jamaica, as soon as the sun has
risen to the point where it throws its greatest heat onto the land, soon
after 9 o’clock in the morning, a wind begins to rise from the sea which
blows across the land from all sides; its strength increases in relation to
1:224 the height of the sun. At one o’clock in the afternoon, when it is naturally
hottest, the wind is strongest and gradually decreases with the setting of
the sun so that in the evening the same stillness prevails as at sunrise.
Without this desirable arrangement, this island would be uninhabitable.
This same relief is enjoyed by all the coasts of countries in hot zones.
They are also the ones that need it most, because, as they are the lowest lying regions of the dry land, they are subject to the greatest heat;
for the regions that are situated higher up, where this sea breeze does
not reach, do not need it as much, since their more elevated situation
places them in a cooler region. Is all this not beautiful, are these not
visible purposes achieved by cleverly applied means? But in opposition,
the naturalist must find the natural causes of this in the most universal
properties of the air without being able to presume special arrangements
for this reason. He observes correctly that these sea breezes must make
such periodic motions even if there were no human beings living on the
island, that is, as a result of no property of the air other than what is
inevitably necessary for the growth of plants, even without any intention
in relation to this, namely a result of its elasticity and mass. The heat of
the sun cancels out the balancing effect of the air by making that which
is over land thinner and thus causes the cooler sea air to raise it from its
position and occupy its place.
In any case, what benefits do the winds not have for the good of the
globe, and what uses does the astuteness of man not make of them! There
are, however, no arrangements necessary to bring them about other than
that same universal character of the air and of heat which must have been
present on the Earth irrespective of these purposes.
At this point, the free thinker says: admit that if useful constitutions
directed at particular purposes can be derived from the most universal
and simple laws of nature without any necessity for any special government by a highest wisdom, then see now the proofs which will catch
you by your own admission. All nature, especially unorganized nature,
is full of such proofs which show that matter, which determines itself
through the mechanism of its forces, has a certain rightness in its con-
1:225 sequences and satisfies the rules of propriety without being forced to. If
a well-intentioned person were to try to dispute this capacity of the universal laws of nature in order to save the good cause of religion, then he
will place himself into an embarrassing situation and give the unbeliever
cause to triumph through a bad defence.
196
But let us see how these reasons, which are feared as being harmful
in the hands of one’s enemies, are instead powerful weapons to dispute
them. Matter, which determines itself through its most universal laws,
by its natural behaviour or, if one wishes to call it so, by a blind mechanism, creates good consequences that appear to be the plan of a highest
wisdom. Air, water, and heat, if one observes them left to their own
devices, cause winds and clouds, rain, rivers that bring moisture to the
lands, and all those useful consequences without which nature would
necessarily remain sad, empty, and barren. However, they do not bring
those consequences by some mere chance or accident that might just as
easily have turned out to be detrimental, but rather, we see that they
are limited by their natural laws to have this and no other effect. What
are we to think of this harmony? How could it be possible that things
of different natures in connection with one another should aim to bring
about such excellent harmonies and beauty, even for the purposes of such
things which are located, as it were, outside the range of dead matter,
that is, to the benefit of human beings and animals, if they did not have a
common origin, that is, an infinite reason, in which the essential natures
of all things were conceived in relation to each other? If their natures
were necessary for themselves and independently of each other, what
amazing chance, or rather, what an impossibility it would be, that their
natural endeavours should fit them together in such a way as a deliberate
clever choice could have united them.
Now I will confidently apply this to my current purpose. I assume the
matter of the whole world to be universally dispersed and I make complete chaos out of it. I see matter form in accordance with the established
laws of attraction and modify its motion through repulsion. Without the
assistance of any arbitrary inventions, I enjoy the pleasure of seeing the 1:226
creation of a well-ordered whole by reason of established laws of motion
which looks so much like the system of the world we have before our
eyes that I cannot help but regard it as the same. This unexpected development of the order of nature on a large scale initially seems suspicious
to me because it bases such a composite rightness on such a poor and
simple foundation. Finally, I instruct myself from the aforementioned
observation that such a development of nature is not something unheard
of, but that its essential endeavour necessarily brings with it such a development, and that this is the most magnificent evidence of its dependence
on that original being which contains within itself even the origins of
beings themselves and their first laws of causation.d This insight redoubles my trust in the proposal I have made. My confidence increases with
every step I take forward and my timidity ceases completely.
d Wirkungsgesetze
197
But the defence of your system, people will say, is also the defence of
Epicure’s opinions, which have the greatest similarity with them. I do not
reject all agreement with him. Many have become atheists through the
semblancee of such reasons, which, on closer consideration, could have
convinced them most powerfully of the certainty of the highest being.
The consequences a confused understanding draws from the most faultless principles are often very faulty, and this was the case with Epicure’s
conclusions, even though his conception was in accord with the keenness
of a great mind.
I will therefore not deny that Lucretius’ theory or that of his predecessors, Epicure, Leucippus, and Democritus, has much in common with
mine. Like those philosophers, I posit a first state of nature as a universal
dispersion of the original material of all world-bodies, or atoms as they
call them. Epicure posited a heaviness that caused these elementary particles to fall and this does not seem to be very different to Newtonian
attraction, which I accept; he also accorded them a certain deviation from
the straight linear motion of their fall, even though he had absurd notions
of their causes and effects: This deviation to some extent corresponds
1:227 to the change in the straight fall that we attribute to the repulsive force
of the particles; finally, the whirlpools that arose out of the perturbedf
motion of the atoms were a centrepiece of the theories of Leucippus and
Democritus, and they will also be found in ours. The close relationship
with a doctrine that was the proper theory of the denial of the divine in
antiquity, will not, however, drag mine into association with their errors.
Even in the most senseless opinions that have succeeded in gaining the
applause of men, we will always find some truth. One false principle or a
few ill-considered connecting principles will lead men from the path of
truth via imperceptible errors right into the abyss. Despite the similarity
I have just mentioned, there does nonetheless remain one basic difference between ancient cosmogony and the current one, which allows us
to draw quite opposite conclusions from the latter.
The aforementioned teachers of the mechanical origins of the
universeg derived all the order that could be perceived in it from the
accidental chance that made the atoms come together so fortuitously
that they constituted a well-ordered whole. Epicure was even so impudent that he insisted that the atoms deviated from their straight motion
without any reason in order to be able to encounter one another. All of
them together took this nonsense to the point that they made this blind
coincidence the origin of all living creatures and really derived reason
from the lack of reason.9 In my theory, however, I find that matter is
e Schein
f verwirrten
g Weltbaues
198
tied to certain necessary laws. In their complete dissolution and dispersion, I see a beautiful and orderly whole develop quite naturally. This
does not happen through accident and by chance, but rather one can
see that natural properties bring it about in a necessary fashion. Does
not this move one to ask: Why did matter have to have precisely such
laws as have order and propriety as their purpose? Was it really possible
that many things, each of which has a nature independent of the others,
should determine each other by themselves in precisely such a way that
a well-ordered whole emerges from it, and if they do this, does this not
provide an undeniable proof of their common first origin, which must
be an all-sufficient highest mind in which the natures of things were 1:228
designed in accordance with unified purposes?
Matter, which is the original materialh of all things, is thus bound by
certain laws, and if it is left freely to these laws, it must necessarily bring
forth beautiful combinations. It is not at liberty to deviate from this plan
of perfection. Since, therefore, it is subject to a most wise purpose, it
must necessarily have been placed into such harmonious connections by
a first cause that ruled over it, and a God exists precisely because nature
cannot behave in any way other than in a regular and orderly manner, even in
chaos.
I have such a good opinion of the honest attitude of those who do
my proposal the honour of examining it that I consider myself assured
that the reasons mentioned will at least put the purity of my intention
beyond doubt, even if they do not yet remove all concerns about the
harmful consequences of my system. If, notwithstanding this, there are
spiteful zealots who regard it as a worthy duty of their holy calling to
attach harmful interpretations to the most innocent opinions, then I am
sure that their judgement will have an effect on all reasonable people
that is exactly the opposite of their intention. Furthermore, I will not
be deprived of the right that Descartes always enjoyed from fair judges
when he dared to explain the formation of the heavenly bodies from
purely mechanical laws. I will therefore quote the authors of the universal history of the world:* “We, however, cannot but believe that the
attempt by this philosopher, who attempts to explain the formation of
the world over a certain period of time from chaotic matter by the simple
continuation of a motion once impressed on it and has reduced this to a
few simple and universal laws of motion, just as little as others who have
since then and with much applause tried to do the same thing from the original and created properties of matter, is punishable or demeaning of God
* Part I, §88.
h Urstoff
199
as many have imagined, because instead, a higher conception of his infinite
wisdom is brought about by this means.”10
1:229 I have attempted to remove the difficulties that appeared to threaten
my propositions from the point of view of religion. There are several that
are no less significant in relation to the matter itself. If it is true, people
will say, that God has placed into the forces of nature a secret ability to
form itself out of chaos into a perfect world constitution,i then will the
mind of man, which is so weak in relation to the lowest things, be capable
of investigating the hidden properties in so great a subject matterj? Such
an endeavourk is the same as if one were to say: just give me matter and
I will build you a world out of it. Cannot the weakness of your insights,
which is made as nought by the slightest things that occur near you every
day, teach you that it is futile to try to discover the immeasurable and
what took place in nature even before the world existed? I shall destroy
this difficulty by demonstrating clearly that of all the investigations that
could be raised in the study of nature, this is the one in which one can
most easily and most surely reach back as far as its beginning. Just as
of all the tasks facing research into nature, none has been resolved with
greater accuracy and certainty than the true constitution of the universel
on the large scale, the laws of motion, and the internal mechanism of
the orbits of all the planets into which Newtonian philosophy can give
such insights as can be found in no other part of philosophy: just so, I
maintain, that of all the things in nature whose first cause we can investigate, the origin of the world systemm and the generation of the heavenly
bodies together with the causes of their motions is the one which we
might first hope to understand thoroughly and reliably. The reason for
this is simple to see. The heavenly bodies are spherical masses, that is,
of the simplest form that any body can have whose origin one seeks.
Their motion is similarly unmixed. It is nothing other than a free continuation of a tangential force11 once impressed,n which, combined with
the attraction of the body in the centre, becomes circular. Furthermore,
the space in which they move is empty, the distances separating them
are quite uncommonly great and thus all are placed most clearly separate from one another both in unimpededo motion and for the clear
1:230 observation of it. It seems to me that in a certain sense one could say
here without being presumptuous: Give me matter and I will build a world
out of it, that is, give me matter and I will show you how a world is to
come into being out of it. Because if matter endowed with an essential
i Weltverfassung
j Vorwurfe
k Unterfangen
l Verfassung des Weltbaues
m Weltsystems
n eines einmal eingedruckten Schwunges ¨
o unverwirrten
200
attractive force is present, then it is not difficult to determine those causes
that can have contributed to the arrangement of the world system,p
viewed on the large scale. We know what is necessary for a body to
achieve a spherical shape, we understand what is required for freefloating spheres to adopt a circular motion around the centre point to
which they are attracted. The position of the orbits in relation to each
other, the coincidence of the direction, the eccentricity, all this can be
reduced to the simplest mechanical causes, and we can confidently hope
to discover them because they can be posited on the simplest and clearest
grounds. But can we claim such advantages about the most insignificant
plant or insect? Are we in a position to say: Give me matter and I will show
you how a caterpillar can be created? Do we not get stuck at the first step due
to ignorance about the true inner nature of the object and the complexity
of the diversity contained in it? It should therefore not be thought strange
if I dare to say that we will understand the formation of all the heavenly bodies, the cause of their motion, in short, the origin of the whole
present constitution of the universeq sooner than the creation of a single
plant or caterpillar becomes clearly and completely known on mechanical
grounds.
These are the reasons upon which I base my confidence that the physical part of cosmologyr may in future hope for that completeness to
which Newton raised its mathematical half. Next to the laws governing
the universes in its current constitution, there are perhaps no others in
the whole of research on nature capable of being so determined mathematically as those according to which it came about, and without doubt
the hand of a practised mathematician would cultivate fruitful fields
here.
After I have made the effort to commend a favourable reception for
the subjectt of my observations, I may be allowed briefly to explain the 1:231
way in which I have treated it. The first part is concerned with a new
system of the structure of the universeu on the large scale. Herr Wright
of Durham,12 with whose treatise I became acquainted through the
Hamburg Freie Urteile of the year 1751,13 first gave me cause to regard
the fixed stars not as a scattered milling mass without any visible order,
but rather as a system with the greatest similarity to a planetary one, so
that, just as in the latter the planets are very close to a common plane,
so also the fixed stars in their position relate as closely as possible to
a certain plane, which has to be thought of as extending through the
entire heavens, and where they are most densely massed, they form the
p Weltsystems
q Weltbau
r Weltwissenschaft
s Weltbau
t Vorwurf
u Weltgebaude ¨
201
bright band that is called the Milky Way. I have become convinced that,
because this zone, illuminated by countless suns, has very exactly the
direction of a very large circle, our sun must also be very close to this
large plane of reference. While pursuing the causes of this feature, I
have found the following to be very probable: that the fixed stars could
actually be slowly moving planets of a higher order. As confirmation of
what will be found about this thought in its proper place, I will quote
here just one section of Herr Bradley’s treatise on the motion of fixed
stars.14 “If a judgement may be formed, <with regard to this matter,>
from the result of the comparison of our best modern observations, with
such as were formerly made with any tolerable degree of exactness; there
appears to have been a real change in the position of some of the fixed
stars with respect to each other; and such, as seems independent of any
motion in our own system, and can only be referred to some motion in
the stars themselves. Arcturus affords a strong proof of this. For if its
present declination be compared with its place, as determined either by
Tycho or Flamsteed, the difference will be found to be much greater
than what can be suspected to arise from the uncertainty of their observations. It is reasonable to expect that other instances of the like kind
must also occur among the great number of visible stars; because their
1:232 relative positions may be altered by various means. For if our own solar
system be conceived to change its place with respect to absolute space,
this might, in process of time, occasion an apparent change in the angular
distances of the fixed stars; and in such a case, the places of the nearest
stars being more affected, than of those that are very remote; their relative positions might seem to alter; tho’ the stars themselves were really
immoveable. And on the other hand, if our own system be at rest and
any of the stars really in motion, this might likewise vary their apparent
positions; and the more so, the nearer they are to us, <or the swifter
their motions are,> or the more proper the direction of the motion is,
to be rendered visible by us. Since then the <relative> places of the
stars may be changed from such a variety of causes, considering the
amazing distances at which it is certain that some of them are placed,
it may require the observation of many ages, to determine the laws of
the apparent changes, even of a single star; much more difficult therefore must it be, to settle the laws relating to all the most remarkable
stars.”v,15
I cannot determine exactly the borders between the system of Herr
Wright and my own and in what ways I have merely imitated his model
or have explained it further. But acceptable reasons presented themselves
to me afterwards to extend it considerably in one direction. I observed
v Texts enclosed within <> are in the original, but not in Kant’s text.
202
the kind of nebulous stars that Herr von Maupertius considers in his
Treatise on the Figure of the Stars*,16 and which have the figure of more 1:233
or less open ellipses, and readily assured myself that they could be nothing other than an accumulation of many fixed stars. The roundness of
these figures that is measured at all times taught me that an inconceivably numerous mass of stars must be arranged here around a common
centre point, because otherwise their free positions in relation to one
another would present irregular shapes but not measured figures. I also
realized that in the system in which they are united, they must be mainly
limited to one plane, because they do not present circular but elliptical
figures and that, because of their pale light, they must be incomprehensibly distant from us. The treatise itself will present to the investigation of the unprejudiced reader what I have concluded from these 1:234
analogies.
* Because I do not have the quoted treatise to hand, I will add here the relevant pieces from
the explanation in the Ouvrages diverses de Msr de Maupertius in the Actis Erud. (1745).
The first phenomenon are those bright spots in the sky that are called nebulous stars
and are thought to be an accumulation of small fixed stars. With the aid of excellent
telescopes, however, astronomers have found them to be merely large oblong spots that
are somewhat brighter than the rest of the sky. Huygen was the first to find something of
this sort in Orion; Halley discusses six such spots in the Anglical Trans: 1. In the sword of
Orion, 2. In Sagittarius, 3. In the Centaur, 4. In front of the right foot of Antinous, 5. In
Hercules, 6. In the belt of Andromeda. If these are viewed through a reflective telescope
of 8 feet, one can see that only a quarter of them can be considered as a mass of stars; the 1:233
remainder have only presented whitish spots without any significant difference, except
that one is more in the nature of a round circle, another is more oblong. It also appears
that in the case of the former, the small stars visible through the telescope cannot be
the cause of their whitish shimmer. Halley believes that these phenomena can explain
what is found in the beginning of the creation story in Genesis, namely that light was
created before the Sun. Derham compares them with openings through which a further
immeasurable region and perhaps the fire sky shines through. He thinks he has been
able to observe that those stars that have been seen near these spots are much closer
to us than lighter places. To these observations the author appends a list of nebulous
stars from Hevelius. He regards these phenomena as great light masses that have been
flattened by a mighty change. If the matter of which they consist had the same power
of light as the other stars, they would have to be of immense size so that, viewed from a
far greater distance than the other stars, they are still able to appear in the telescope as
having remarkable shape and size. If, however, they were approximately similar to the
other fixed stars in size, they would not only have to be much closer to us but also give
off a much weaker light, since they have such a pale shimmer despite such proximity and
apparent size. It would therefore be worth the effort to discover their parallax if they
have one. For those who say they have none are perhaps extrapolating their conclusion
from some cases to all. The small stars encountered in the middle of these spots, as in
Orion (or even better in the one in front of the right foot of Antinous, which looks no
different to a fixed star surrounded by a nebula), would, if they were closer to us, be
seen either in the manner of a projection onto it, or would shine through those masses,
as though through the tails of comets.
203
In the second part, which contains the most essential objectw of this
treatise, I seek to develop the constitution of the universex from the
simplest state of nature through mechanical laws alone. If I may dare to
suggest to those who are outraged at the boldness of this undertaking that
they adopt a certain order in their examination with which they honour
my thoughts, then I would request that they read the eighth chapter
first, which I hope may prepare their judgement towards a correct insight.
If, however, I invite the gentle reader to examine my opinions, then I
am rightly concerned that, since hypotheses of this type are usually not
held in higher esteem than philosophical dreams, it will be a sour favour
for a reader to decide to undertake a careful examination of the histories
of nature that I have thought up for myself and patiently to follow the
author through the twists and turns by which he avoids the difficulties
he encounters, in order finally perhaps to laugh at his own gullibility,
like the audience of the London market crier.*,17 I can, however, confidently promise that if the reader is hopefully persuaded by the suggested
preparatory section to dare to undertake such a physical adventure on the
basis of such probable conjectures, he will not encounter as many dead
ends and impassable obstacles on his way as he might have originally
feared.
It is with the greatest care that I have indeed relinquished all arbitrary
inventions. I have, after I placed the world in the simplest chaos, made
use of no forces other than those of attraction and repulsion to develop
the great order of nature, two forces which are equally certain, equally
simple, and equally original and universal. They have both been borrowed from Newtonian philosophy. The former is now a law of nature
that is beyond doubt. The second, which Newtonian science is unable
to provide with as much clarity as it has for the first, I will assume here
1:235 only in the sense that no one rejects it, namely in relation to the smallest dispersion of matter as, for instance, in vapours. It is for these so
simple reasons that I have derived the following system, without any
artifice or consideration of other consequences than those upon which
the attention of the reader would have arrived by itself.
Finally, I ask to be permitted a short explanation relating to the validity
and the presumed value of those propositions which will appear in the
following theory and according to which I would wish to be examined by
fair judges. The author is properly judged according to the stamp he puts
on his wares; I therefore hope that one will not require any more strict
responsibility of my opinions in the different parts of this treatise than
the value I give to them myself. In fact, the greatest geometrical acuity
* Cf. Gellert’s fable: Hans Nord
w Vorwurf x Weltbau
204
and mathematical infallibility can never be demanded of a treatise of this
kind. If the system is based on analogies and harmonies in accordance
with the rules of credibility and a correct way of thinking, it has satisfied
all the requirements of its object. I believe that I have attained this level
of competence in some parts of this treatise, such as in the theory of
the system of fixed stars, in the hypothesis of the nature of the nebulous
stars, in the general plan of the mechanical creation of the universe,y in
the theory of the ring of Saturn and several others. Certain other parts of
my explanation will be less satisfying, for instance the determination of
the relations of eccentricity, the comparison of the masses of the planets,
the varied deviations of the comets, and some others.
If, therefore, in the seventh chapter, enticed by the fruitfulness of the
system and the attractiveness of the greatest and most admirable thing
we are capable of imagining, and while adhering to the thread of analogy
and a reasonable credibility, I extend the results of our doctrinez as far as
possible; if I represent the infinite nature of all creation, the formation
of new worlds and the decline of the old ones and the unlimited realm of
the chaos of the imagination: I hope the reader will grant the charming
attractiveness of the object and the pleasure one experiences in seeing the
agreement of a theory in its greatest extension, sufficient consideration so 1:236
as not to judge it according to the greatest geometrical strictness, which
does not in any case have any relevance in this type of consideration. It is
precisely this fairness I expect in the third part. Nonetheless, the reader
will find somewhat more than mere arbitrariness but somewhat less than
undoubtedness in it.
y des Weltbaues z des Lehrgebaudes ¨
2051:237 Contents
of the whole work.
part one.
Summary of a universal systematic constitution among the fixed
stars, derived from the phenomena of the Milky Way. Similarity
of this system of fixed stars with the system of the planets. Discovery of
many such systems that show themselves in the vastness of the heavens in
the shape of elliptical figures. New concept of the systematic constitution
of all creation.
Conclusion. Probable supposition of several planets beyond Saturn
based on the law according to which the eccentricity of the planets
increases with distance.
part two.
Chapter One.
Reasons for the doctrine of a mechanical origin of the world. Reasons to the contrary. The only concept among all those possible that will
satisfy both. First state of nature. Dispersion of the elements of all matter throughout the entire universe.a First movementb through attraction.
Beginning of the formation of a body at the point of the most powerful
attraction. General sinking of the elements towards this central body.
Repellent force of the smallest parts in which matter has been dissolved.
Altered direction of the sinking motion through the combination of this
force with the former. Uniform direction of all these motions towards
one and the same area. Endeavour of all particles to reach a common
plane and to congregate there.Moderation of the velocity of their motion
1:238 to an equilibrium with the gravity of the distance of their place. Free orbit
of all particles around the central body in circles. Formation of the planets out of these moved elements. Free motion of the planets thus formed
in the same direction on a common plane near the centre point in almost
circular orbits and with increasing degrees of eccentricity further away
from it.
a Weltraum b Regung
206
Chapter Two.
Treats of the varying density of the planets and the relationship of
their masses. Reason why the closer planets are of a denser type than
the distant ones. Insufficiency of Newton’s explanation.Why the central
body is of a lighter kind than the spheres orbiting next to it. Relationship
of the mass of the planets in proportion to the distances. Causes from
the manner of their formation, according to which the central body
has the greatest mass. Calculation of the thinnessc with which all the
elements of the world matter were dispersed. Probability and necessity
of this thinning. Important proof of the manner of the formation of the
heavenly bodies based on a remarkable analogy by Herr de Buffon.
Chapter Three.
Concerning the eccentricity of the planetary orbits and the origin
of comets.The eccentricity increases in direct proportion to the distance
from the Sun. Cause of this law from cosmogony. Why the orbits of
comets diverge freely from the plane of the eclipse. Proof that the comets
are formed from the lightest type of material. Incidental comment on
the Northern Lights.
Chapter Four.
On the origin of moons and the rotation of planets on their axis.
The material for the formation of the moons was contained in the sphere
from which the planet gathered the parts for its own formation. Cause of
the motion of these moons with all their determinations. Why only the
large planets have moons. On the axial rotation of the planets. Whether
the Moon once had a more rapid rotation? Whether the velocity of the
Earth’s rotation is decreasing? Concerning the position of the axis of the
planets in relation to the plane of their orbits. Shifting of their axis.
Chapter Five.
Concerning the origin of the ring around Saturn and the calculation of its daily revolution from its relations. First state of Saturn
compared to the constitution of a comet. Formation of a ring from the 1:239
particles of its atmosphere by means of the motions impressed by its
orbit. Determination of its axial rotation on the basis of this hypothesis.
Observation of the shape of Saturn. On the spheroidal flattening of the
heavenly bodies in general. More detailed description of the constitution
c Dunnigkeit ¨
207
of this ring. Probable assumption of new discoveries. Whether the Earth
had a ring before the Great Flood?
Chapter Six.
Concerning the Zodiacal Light.
Chapter Seven.
Concerning creation in the whole extent of its infinity in terms
of space as well as of time. Origin of a great system of fixed stars.
Central bodiesd in the centre of the stellar system. Infinity of creation.
Universal systematic relationship in its entire essence.e Central bodies
of all nature. Successive continuation of creation in all infinity of time
and space through the unceasing formation of new worlds. Observation
on the chaos of unformed nature. Gradual decay and collapse of the
universe.f Proper nature of such a concept. Rejuvenation of decayed
nature.
Supplement to Chapter Seven.
Universal theory and history of the Sun in general. Why the central
body of a universeg is a fiery body. Closer observation of its nature.
Thoughts on the changes of the air surrounding it. Extinction of suns.
Detailed view of their form. Opinion of Herr Wrigth [sic] on the centre
point of all nature. Correction of this.
Chapter Eight.
General proof of the correctness of a mechanical doctrine of the
arrangement of the universeh in general, especially of the certainty
of the present one. The essential ability of the natures of things to raise
themselves to order and perfection is the most beautiful proof of the
existence of God. Defence against naturalism’s objections.
The constitution of the universei is simple and not beyond the powers of nature. Analogies that prove the mechanical origin of the world
1:240 with certainty. The same proved from deviations. Adducing an immediate divine ordering is not sufficient for these questions. Difficulty that
caused Newton to give up the mechanical theory. Resolution of this
d Centralkorper ¨
e Inbegriffe
f Weltbau
g Weltbau
h Weltbau
i Weltbau
208
difficulty. The system advanced is the only means of all possible ones to
do justice to both kinds of reasons. It is proved further by the ratio of
the density of the planets, their masses, the distances between them, and
the graded connection of their determinations. The motivations behind
God’s choice do not determine these circumstances directly. Justification in relation to religion. Difficulties arising from a doctrine of direct
divine ordering.
part three.
Contains a comparison between the inhabitants of the heavenly
bodies.
Whether all planets are inhabited. Reasons for doubting it. Grounds
for the physical relations between the inhabitants of different planets. Observation of human beings. Causes of the imperfection of their
nature. Natural ratio of bodily properties of living creatures in accordance with the differing distance from the Sun. Consequences of the ratio
for their mental abilities. Comparison of thinking natures on different
heavenly bodies. Confirmation on the basis of certain circumstances of
their abode. Further proof from the arrangements of divine providence
that are made for their good.j Brief digression.
conclusion.
The conditions of human beings in the next life.
j zu ihrem Besten
209Universal 1:241
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens
Part One.
Summary of a systematic constitution among the
fixed stars
and also
of the vast number of such systems of fixed stars
Is the great chain that draws all to agree,
And drawn supports, upheld by God or thee?
Pope.181:243 Short summary of the most essential basic
concepts
of
Newtonian science,*
which are necessary for understanding what
follows.
Six planets, three of which have satellites, Mercury, Venus, Earth with
its Moon, Mars, Jupiter with four and Saturn with five satellites, which
describe orbits with the Sun at the centre, as well as the comets which
do likewise, coming from all sides in very extensive orbits, constitute
a system which we call the solar systemk or the planetary universe.l,19
Because it is circular and is on a closed orbit, the motion of all these
bodies presupposes two forces that are both equally necessary in every
type of doctrine, that is, a shooting force,m which would cause them
to continue in a direction straight ahead at every point of their curved
path and move into an infinity if there were not also a second force,
whatever it may be, which constantly forced them to leave that path and
to proceed in a curved path with the Sun at its centrepoint. This second
force, as is indubitably determined by geometry itself, aims at the Sun
from all points and is thus called the sinking, the centripetal force or also
gravity.
1:244 If the orbits of the heavenly bodies were exact circles, then the simplest analysis of the composition of curved motions would show that a
continuous push towards the centre point is required for this; however,
although these motions of all planets and comets are ellipses with the
Sun as a common focus, higher geometry, with the assistance of Kepler’s
Analogy20 (according to which the radius vector, or the line drawn
from the planets to the Sun, always sweeps out such spaces from the
elliptical orbit that are proportional to the times), demonstrates with
infallible certainty that a force would have to continuously drive the
* I wanted to provide this brief introduction, which may perhaps be superfluous in the
view of most readers, for those who are not sufficiently knowledgeable about Newtonian
principles, as a preparation for understanding the theory that follows.
k System der Sonne
l Weltbau
m schießende Kraft
212
planet throughout its entire orbit to the centre point of the Sun. This
lowering forcen then, which applies throughout the entire planetary system and is directed towards the Sun, is an established phenomenon of
nature, and the law by which this force extends from the centre to the far
reaches of space has been equally reliably proved. It always decreases in
inverse proportion to the square of the increase in distance from the centre. This rule flows in just as infallible a manner from the time required
by the planets for their orbits at varying distances. These times are always
the square roots of the cube of the mean distances from the Sun, from
which we can deduce that the force attracting these heavenly bodies to
the centre point of their revolutions must decrease in inverse proportion
to the square of the distance.21
Precisely the same law that applies among the planets in so far as
they orbit around the Sun, is also found in small systems, namely those
constituted by moons orbiting around their main planets. The durations
of their orbits are proportional to the distances in precisely the same way
and establish precisely the same ratio of the lowering force in relation
to the planet as that to which the planet is subject in relation to the
Sun. All this is forever beyond any contradiction as a result of the most
infallible geometry based on indisputable observations. In addition there
is the idea that this lowering forceo is the same impetus as what is called
gravity on the surface of the planet and which decreases gradually with
distance in accordance with the above law. This may be observed by
comparing the quantum of gravity on the surface of the Earth with the 1:245
force that drives the Moon to the centre point of its orbit, which stands to
it exactly as does the attraction in the entire universe, that is, in inverse
proportion to the square of the distances. This is the reason why the
often mentioned central force is also called gravity.
Furthermore, because it is probable in the highest degree that if an
effect occurs only in the presence of and in proportion to the attraction
to a particular body, its direction is also related precisely to that body,
we may believe that this body is the cause, in whatever manner, of that
effect; so it has been thought that there was sufficient reason on account
of this to ascribe this general sinking of the planets towards the Sun to
an attracting force of the latter and to attribute this capacity of attraction
to all heavenly bodies in general.
If, therefore, a body is left freely to this drive, which causes it to sink
towards the Sun or some planet, then it will fall down towards it at a
constantly accelerated motion and unite with that mass in a short time.
If, however, it has received a blow to one side, then, provided the blow is
not so strong as to be exactly equivalent to the force of the sinking, it will
n Senkungskraft o Senkungskraft
213
sink towards the central body in a curved motion and if the tangential
forcep impressed upon it was at least as powerful as to remove it before
it touches its surface from the vertical line by half the thickness of the
body at the centre, then it will not touch its surface but, after it has swung
closely around it, it will rise as high again as it has fallen by means of the
velocity it has reached in falling, so that it will continue its path around
it in a constant orbital motion.
The difference between the orbits of the comets and the planets therefore consists in the deviationq of the sideways motion against the pressure
that drives them to fall; which two forces, the more they approach equality, the more the orbit is similar to the shape of a circle and the less similar
they are, the weaker the shooting forcer is in relation to the central force,
the more elongated the circle, or as it is called, the more eccentric it is
because the heavenly body approaches the Sun very much more closely
in one part of its orbit than in another part.
1:246 Because nothing in all of nature is balanced with complete precision,
no planet has a completely circular motion, but comets deviate from it
most because the tangential forces that has been impressed upon them
from the side was least proportional to the central force of its original
distance.
In the treatise, I shall frequently use the expression of a systematic
constitution of the universe.t So that there will be no difficulty in
understanding what is meant by this, I shall explain it briefly. Actually, all
the planets and comets that belong to our universeu constitute a system
simply because they orbit around a common central body. But I take
this term in a narrower meaning in that I consider the more precise
relationships that have made their connection to one another regular
and uniform. The orbits of the planets relate as closely as possible to
a common plane, namely to the extended equatorial plane of the Sun;
the deviation from this rule occurs only at the outermost border of the
system, where all motions gradually cease. If, therefore, a certain number
of heavenly bodies that are arranged around a common central point and
move around this, are simultaneously restricted to a certain plane in such
a way that they have the freedom to deviate from it to either side only
as little as possible; if such deviation occurs gradually only in those that
are most remote from the centre point and thus participate less in the
relationships than the others: then, I say, that these bodies are related to
each other in a systematic constitution.
p Schwung
q Abwiegung
r schießende Kraft
s Schwung
t systematische Verfassung des Weltbaues
u Weltbau
214Universal 1:247
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.
part one.
Concerning the systematic constitution among the fixed stars.
The theoryv of the universal constitution of the universe has attained no
noticeable increase since the times of Huygens.22 We know no more now
than was known at that time, namely that six planets with ten satellites,
all of which have the circles of their orbits directed nearly onto one
plane, and the eternal cometic spheres spreading out in all directions
make a system, the centre of which is the Sun, towards which everything
sinks, around which all their motions go, and by which they are all lit,
warmed, and filled with life;w that, finally, the fixed stars are the suns of
just as many similar systems, in which everything may be just as large and
arranged in just so orderly a way as in our system, and that infinite space
is brimming with solar systems,x the number and excellence of which
has a relationship to the immeasurableness of their creator.
The systematic aspects that took place in the connection of the planets
orbiting around their suns disappeared here in the multitude of the fixed
stars, and it seemed that the relationships that were found on a small scale
and had the character of laws, did not apply on the large scale among
the parts of the universe; the fixed stars were not given any law by which
their situations in relation to each other were restricted and they were
seen to fill all the heavens and all the heavens of heavens without any 1:248
order or intention. Ever since mankind’s desire for knowledge has placed
these limits upon itself, no one has done anything more than to deduce
from it and admire the greatness of the one who has revealed himself in
such inconceivably great works.
It was given to Herr Wright of Durham,23 an Englishman, to undertake a fortunate step towards an observation that he does not seem to
have put to any very useful purpose and the useful application of which
he did not observe sufficiently. He regarded the fixed stars not as a disorderly mass distributed without any intent, but rather found a systematic
v Lehrbegriff
w belebt
x Weltgebauden ¨
215
constitution in the whole and a universal relationship between these stars
and a main plane of the space they occupy.y
We shall try to improve upon the idea he advanced and to give it that
turn by which it can be productive of important consequences, the full
confirmation of which will be reserved for future times.
Anyone who looks at the sky full of stars on a clear night will be aware
of the bright band that, because of the large number of stars that are
concentrated there more than elsewhere and because of the fact that in
the enormous distances they can no longer be seen as individual stars,
exhibits a uniform light, which has been given the name of the Milky
Way. It is amazing that observers of the heavens were not moved long
ago by the nature of this noticeably different zone to adduce particular
characteristics in the position of the fixed stars from it. For it can be
seen to occupy the direction of a great circle and in an uninterrupted
connection around the entire heavens, two conditions that contain within
themselves such a precise determination and characteristics that are so
noticeably different from the vagueness of the arbitrary that attentive
astronomers ought naturally to have been inspired by this to seek an
explanation of such a phenomenon with diligence.
Because the stars are not placed on the apparently concave heavenly
sphere but rather, with one being further from our point of view than
the other, lose themselves in the depths of the heavens, it follows from
this phenomenon that at the distances in which they stand from us one
1:249 behind the other, they are not distributed in all directions arbitrarily,
but must relate principally to a particular plane that passes through our
point of view and to which they are set to be found as close as possible.
This relationship is so undoubted a phenomenon that even the remaining stars that are not included in the whitish band of the Milky Way,
are nonetheless seen to be more concentrated and more dense the closer
their position is to the circle of the Milky Way, such that, of the 2,000
stars visible to the naked eye, the greater part is found in a not very wide
zone of which the Milky Way is the centre.
Now, if we think a plane drawn through the firmament in unlimited
distances and assume that all the fixed stars and systems stand in a universal relationship to this plane so that they are closer to it than to other
regions, then an eye situated in this plane of reference will perceive, in
its view into the field of stars at the concave spherical surface of the
firmament, this densest concentration of stars in the direction of such
a drawn plane in the form of a zone illuminated by much more light.
This light band will extend in the direction of a largest circle because the
position of the observer is in the plane itself. In this zone there will be a
y gegen einen Hauptplan der Raume, die sie einnehmen ¨
216
multitude of stars which, because they are so small as to be indistinguishable as individual bright points and because of their apparent density,
appear as a uniform whitish shimmering, in a word, as a milky way. The
remaining heavenly array, the relationship of which to the drawn plane
gradually diminishes or which may also be closer to the standpoint of the
observer, will be perceived as more widely distributed even though still
related to this plane on account of its concentration. Finally, it follows
from this that, because from our solar systemz this system of fixed stars
is perceived in the direction of a largest circle, it is part of this very same
great plane and constitutes a system with them.
In order to delve better into the nature of the universal connection
ruling the universe,a we shall try to discover the reason why the places
of the fixed stars are related to a common plane.
The Sun does not limit the extent of its attractive force to the nar- 1:250
row region of the planetary system. To all appearances, it extends it to
infinity. The comets, which travel very far beyond the orbit of Saturn,
are forced by the attraction of the Sun to return again and to proceed
in orbits. Although, therefore, it is in the nature of a force that appears
to be incorporated into the essence of matter that it should be more
appropriate to it to be unlimited, and it really is acknowledged as such
by those who accept Newton’s laws, we want it to be admitted only that
this attraction of the Sun extends approximately to the nearest fixed star,
and that the fixed stars are efficacious to the same extent as so many suns,
so that it follows that the entire host of these is striving to draw closer to
each other by attraction; thus all the solar systemsb are in the situation
that, by unceasing and unhindered reciprocal approaching, they would
sooner or later collapse into one lump were it not that this destruction
was prevented, just as the spheres in our own planetary system are, by
forces fleeing the centre point, because they divert the heavenly bodies
from a straight fall and, together with the forces of attraction, create the
eternal orbits, as a result of which the edificec of creation is protected
from destruction and made appropriate to an unending duration.
Thus all the suns of the firmament have orbital motions either around
one universal centre point or around many. In this context, we may
use the analogy of what has been observed in the orbits of our solar
system,d namely that the same cause that has imparted centrifugal forcee
to the planets as a result of which they describe their orbits, has also
arranged them in such a way that they all relate to one plane, which is
therefore also the cause, whatever it may be, that what has given the
z Sonnenwelt
a Weltbau
b Weltsysteme
c Gebaude ¨
d Sonnenwelt
e Centerfliehkraft
217
power of rotationf,24 to the suns of the upper world, as so many moving
stars of higher orders of worlds, has, at the same time, brought their
orbits into one plane as much as possible and striven to limit deviations
therefrom.
According to this representation, the system of the fixed stars may be
described approximately by the planetary one, if the latter is extended
infinitely. Because if, instead of the six planets with their ten satellites,
we assume as many thousands of them and instead of the twenty-eight or
1:251 thirty comets that have been observed, we assume a hundred or thousand
times as many, if we think of these very bodies as self-illuminating, then
to the eye of an observer looking from the Earth, they would create the
appearance as of the fixed stars of the Milky Way. Because the planets
under consideration, through their proximity to their common plane of
reference, would exhibit for us, who are in precisely the same plane on
our Earth, a zone brightly illuminated by countless stars directed towards
the greatest circle; this bright band would be filled with plenty of stars
everywhere, even though according to the hypothesis, they would be
moving stars and thus not attached to one place, because there would
always be enough stars on one side through its displacement, even though
others had changed their place.
The width of this illuminated zone, which represents a kind of zodiac,
will be caused by the different degrees of deviation of the aforementioned
planetsg from their plane of reference and by the inclination of their
orbits towards the same surface, and because most of them are close to
this plane, their number will appear more dispersed according to the
degree of their distance from this plane, but the comets, which occupy
all regions without distinction, will cover the field of the heavens on both
sides.
The shape of the heavens of the fixed stars therefore has no other cause
than being exactly the same systematic constitution on a large scale as
the planetary system has on a small one, in that all suns make up one
system, whose universal plane of reference is the Milky Way. Those with
the least reference to this plane are seen as being to one side, but they
are less concentrated precisely because they are more widely dispersed
and rarer. They are, as it were, the comets among the suns.
This new doctrine, however, attributes to the suns a motion away
from each other, but everyone cognizes them as unmoving and fixed in
their places from the beginning. The name that was given to the fixed
stars for this reason appears to be confirmed and undoubted through
the observations of all the centuries. This difficulty would destroy the
doctrine advanced above if it were with foundation. However, to all
f Kraft der Umwendung g Irrsterne
218
appearances, this lack of motion is merely apparent.h It is either only
an exceptional slowness brought about by the great distance from the
common centrepoint of their orbit, or by its imperceptible nature on 1:252
account of the distance from the point of observation. Let us estimate the
probability of this conception by calculating the motion that a fixed star
near our Sun would have if we assume that our Sun were the centre point
of its orbit. If its radius is assumed to be more than 21,000 times greater
than the distance of the Sun from the Earth, using Huygens’ figures,
then according to the established law of the duration of orbits, which are
in the ratio of the square root of the cube of the distance from the centre,
the time it would take to complete its orbit around the Sun once would
be more than one and a half million years and this would posit a change in
its position of only one degree in 4,000 years.25 Now since perhaps only
very few fixed stars are as close to the Sun as Huygens supposed Sirius
to be, since the distance of the rest of the mass of the heavenly bodies
perhaps exceeds the latter enormously and would therefore require very
much longer times for such a periodic revolution and, furthermore, it is
more probable that the motion of the suns of the starry heavens proceeds
around a common centre point, the distance of which is uncommonly
great and the progress of the stars may therefore be extremely slow, we
can probably deduce from this that the whole time in which we have been
observing the heavens is perhaps still not sufficient to notice the changes
that have taken place in their positions. We should not, however, give up
hope that these will be discovered in time. Subtle and careful observers
as well as a comparison of widely separated observations will be required
for this. These observations would have to be directed principally at the
stars of the Milky Way,* which is the main plane of all motion. Herr
Bradley has observed some scarcely perceptible motions of the stars.
The Ancients noticed stars at certain points of the heavens and we see
new stars at other points. Who knows whether these were the same ones
that had merely changed position. The excellence of the tools and the
perfection of astronomy give us well-founded hope of discovering such 1:253
strange peculiarities.† The credibility of the matter itself for reasons of
nature and analogy support this hope so well that they can stimulate the
attention of researchers of nature to bring them to fulfilment.
* Similarly with those concentrations of stars, many of which are close to one another in
a small space, such as for example the Seven Sisters, which may perhaps constitute a
small system within a larger one.
† De la Hire26 observes in the Memoires ´ of the Academy in Paris of 1693 that he has
perceived a major change in the positions of the stars in the Seven Sisters in his own
observations as well as by comparison of these with those by Ricciolus.27
h etwas Scheinbares
219
The Milky Way is, so to speak, also the zodiac of new stars that can be
seen first to appear and then to disappear as in almost no other region
of the heavens than in this one. When this alternation in its visibility
results from its periodic distance and proximity to us, it seems from the
systematic constitution of the stars noted above that such a phenomenon
can only be seen in the region of the Milky Way. For, as these are stars
that orbit in very oblong circles around other fixed stars as satellites
around their main planets, then the analogy with our planetary system, in
which only those heavenly bodies near the common plane have satellites
orbiting around them, requires that only the stars that are in the Milky
Way have suns orbiting around them.28
I now come to that part of the doctrine advanced that makes it most
attractive because of the sublime view it presents of the plan of creation.
The sequence of thoughts that have led me to it is short and plain. It
consists of the following. If a system of fixed stars, in which their positions
are in a common plane, such as we have sketched the Milky Way, is so
far away from us that all recognition of the individual stars of which it
consists cannot be detected even by a telescope; if its distance relative to
the distance of the stars of the Milky Way is the same as the distance of
the Sun to us – in short, if such a world of fixed stars is viewed at such an
immeasurable distance from the eye of the observer which is outside it,
1:254 then it will appear under a small angle as a minute space illuminated by
a weak light, the shape of which will be round as a circle when its plane
presents itself straight to the eye and elliptical when it is seen from the
side. The weakness of the light, the figure and the perceptible magnitude
of its diameter will clearly distinguish such a phenomenon, if it is present,
from all other stars that can be observed individually.
We need not search long for this phenomenon among the observations of the astronomers. It has been perceived clearly by various
observers. People have been surprised by its rarity; they have made
assumptions and sometimes imagined wondrous things and sometimes
given way to apparent conceptions that, however, turned out to be as
unfounded as the first. We refer here to the nebulous stars, or rather
one type of them, which Herr von Maupertius describes as follows:*
That they are small places illuminated a little more than the darkness of the empty space of the heavens, which all have in common
that they represent more or less open ellipses but whose light is
much weaker than any other that we perceive in the heavens.29
The author of astrotheology imagined that they were openings in the
firmament through which he believed he could see the fiery heavens.30
A philosopher of more enlightened insights, the Herr von Maupertius
* Treatise on the figure of stars.
220
already mentioned, regards them, on the basis of their shape and knowable diameters, as amazingly large heavenly bodies which, viewed from
the side, exhibit elliptical shapes because of the great flattening caused
by the rotational motion.i
It is easy to see that this latter explanation cannot be true either.
Because this kind of nebulous star must without doubt be at least as
distant from us as the other fixed stars, not only would their size be
astounding, since it would exceed that of the largest stars by many
thousands of times, but it would be most strange that, given that they
are self-illuminating bodies and suns, they would show the dullest and
weakest light with this extraordinary size.
It is much more natural and conceivable that these are not single stars
of such size, but systems of many stars, whose distance from us exhibits 1:255
them as being in so narrow a space that the light, which is imperceptible
from each one individually, becomes a uniform pale shimmering with
their immeasurable number. The analogy with the solar system in which
we exist, its shape which is just as it must be according to our theory,
the weakness of the light, which requires us to presuppose an infinite
distance: all this is in agreement with holding the elliptical figures to be
the same solar systems and, so to speak, Milky Ways, the constitution
of which we have just developed; and if presumptions in which analogy
and observation correspond to support each other completely have the
same value as formal proofs, then we will have to regard the certainty of
these systems as proved.31
Now the attention of the observers of the heavens has enough motivation to occupy themselves with this suggestion. The fixed stars, as we
know, all relate to a common plane and thus constitute an orderly whole,
which is a world of worlds. One can see that in the immeasurable distances, there are more such star systems, and that creation in the entire
infinite scope of its size is everywhere systematic and interrelated.
One could also speculate that these higher orders of worlds are not
without connection to one another and that, through this mutual relationship, they constitute in turn an even more immeasurable system.
Indeed, it can be seen that the elliptical figures of this type of nebulous
star adduced by Herr von Maupertius are very closely related to the plane
of the Milky Way. A vast field is open here to discoveries, for which the
key must be provided by observation. Those stars that are called nebulous and those about which there is argument would have to be examined
and tested in terms of this doctrine. If the parts of nature are observed
according to intentionsj and a discovered plan, certain properties are
revealed that would otherwise be overlooked and remain hidden if our
observation is spread over all objects without any guidance.
i Drehungsschwunge j Absichten
221
The theory we have put forward opens a perspective onto the infinite
1:256 field of creation for us and presents some inkling of God’s work that is
appropriate to the infinitude of the great architect.k If the magnitude of
a planetary system in which the Earth is as a grain of sand and scarcely
noticeable puts our reason into a state of wonderment, then with what
amazement are we delighted when we contemplate the infinite multitude
of worlds and systems that constitute the sum total of the Milky Way; but
how much does this amazement increase when one becomes aware that
all these immeasurable orders of stars in turn are the unit of a number
whose end we do not know, and which is perhaps just as inconceivably
great as these and yet is in turn only the unit of a new combination
of numbers. We see the first members of a progressive relationship of
worlds and systems, and the first part of this infinite progression already
gives us to understand what we can suppose about the whole. There is
no end here but rather an abyss of a true immeasurability into which
all capacity of human concepts sinks even if it is raised with the help of
mathematics. The wisdom, the goodness, the power that has revealed
itself, is infinite and in the same measure fruitful and industrious; the plan
of its revelation must for that reason be as infinite and without limits as
it is.
Important discoveries that serve to extend the idea we have of the
magnitude of creation are, however, to be made not only on the large
scale of things. On the smaller scale there is no less that is as yet undiscovered, and we see even in our solar system the parts of a system that are
immeasurably distant from each other and between which the intermediate parts have not yet been discovered. Should there not be between
Saturn, the outermost of the planets we know, and the least eccentric
comet, which come down to us from a perhaps ten or more times greater
distance, any other planet whose motion is closer to the cometic one than
to that of Saturn? And should there not be still others that change the
planets gradually into comets through a convergence of their determinations by means of a series of intermediate links, and the latter type be
connected to the former?
The law according to which the eccentricity of the planetary orbits is
inversely proportional to its distance from the Sun supports this assump-
1:257 tion. The eccentricity in the motions of the planets increases with their
distance from the Sun and the remote planets thus come closer to the
properties of the comets. It is therefore to be assumed that there will be
other planets beyond Saturn, which, being even more eccentric and thus
more closely related to comets, will ultimately, by a continuous ladder,
turn them into comets. The eccentricity of Venus is 1/126th of half the
axis of its elliptical orbit, that of the Earth is 1/58th, of Jupiter 1/20th
k Werkmeister
222
and of Saturn 1/17th; it therefore evidently increases with the distances.
It is true that Mercury and Mars are exceptions to this law because their
eccentricity is much greater than the measure of their distance from
the Sun permits, but we shall learn in what follows that precisely the
same cause why some planets were granted a smaller mass at their formation also resulted in a lack of the tangential forcel necessary for an
orbital motion, consequently in eccentricity, consequently has left them
incomplete in both these respects.
As a result, is it not probable that the decrease32 in the eccentricity
of the heavenly bodies immediately beyond Saturn should be just as
moderate as it is in the closer ones, and that the planets, because of less
sudden decreases,m are related to the class of comets? For it is certain that
precisely this eccentricity constitutes the essential difference between
comets and planets and that their tails and nebulous spheres are merely a
consequence thereof; similarly it is certain that the same cause, whatever
it may be, that has given the heavenly bodies their orbits, was not only
weaker at greater distances to make the tangential forcen equal to the
sinking forceo and has thus left the motions eccentric, but was for that
reason also less able to bring the orbits of these spheres to a common
plane on which the lower ones move and has thus brought about the
deviation of the comets in all directions.
According to this assumption, we might perhaps still have hopes
for the discovery of new planets beyond Saturn that would be more
eccentric than and thus closer to the cometic property; but for just this
reason we would be able to see it for only a brief time, namely in the
time of its perihelion, which circumstance, together with the low degree 1:258
of approach and the weakness of the light, has so far prevented their
discovery and must make it difficult in the future as well. The last planet
and the first comet could, if people so wished, be called that one whose
eccentricity would be so great that in its perihelion it would transect
the orbit of the planet closest to it, perhaps, therefore, that of Saturn.
l Schwunges
m Abfalle ¨
n Drehungsschwung
o Senkungskraft
223Universal 1:259
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens
Part Two
On the first state of nature, the formation of the
heavenly bodies, the causes of their motion and
their systematic relations within the planetary
structure in particular as well as in respect of the
whole of creation
See plastic Nature working to this end,
The single atoms each to other tend.
Attract, attracted to, the next in place,
Formed and impelled its neighbour to embrace,
See Matter next, with various life endu’d,
Press to one centre still.
Pope.331:261 Universal
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.
part two.
chapter one.
Concerning the origin of the planetary systemp as such and the
causes of its motions.
Observation of the universe shows, in consideration of the changed relationships its parts have to one another and by which they show the cause
from which they originate, two sides that are both equally probable and
acceptable. If, on the one hand, we consider that six planets with ten
satellites describe orbits around the Sun as their centre and all of them
move towards one side, namely that side to which the Sun itself turns,
which rules over all their orbits through the force of its attraction, that
the orbits do not deviate far from a common plane, namely that of the
extended equator of the suns, that in the case of the heavenly bodies most
distant but still belonging to our solar system, where the common cause
of the motion, according to what we can assume, was not as powerful as
it was near the centre, deviations from those precise determinations took
place that have a sufficient relation to the lack of impressed motion, if,
as I say, we consider all these connections: then we are moved to believe
that one cause, whatever it may be, has had a pervasive influence in the
entire space of the system, and that the unity in the direction and posi-
1:262 tion of the planetary orbits is a consequence of the agreement they all
must have had with the material cause by which they were set in motion.
On the other hand, if we consider the space in which the planets of
our system orbit, it is completely empty* and deprived of any matter
that might bring about a community of influence on these heavenly
bodies and the agreement among their motions. This circumstance has
been established with complete certainty and exceeds, if possible, the
previous probability. Persuaded by this reason, Newton could not allow
any material cause that would maintain the community of motions by
extending it into the realm of the planetary system. He asserted that the
* I am here not examining whether this space can be called empty in the most proper
sense. For here it suffices to note that all matter that might be encountered in this space
is far too powerless to have any influence on the moved masses at issue.
p Weltbau
226
direct hand of God had arranged this order without the application of
the forces of nature.
An impartial examination shows that the reasons are equally strong
on both sides and both are to be regarded as being completely certain.
However, it is just as clear that there must be a concept in which these
apparently mutually conflicting reasons can and should be united and
that we may seek the true system in this new concept. We propose to
indicate it briefly. In the current constitution of space, in which the
spheres of the entire world of planets orbit, there is no material cause
that could impress or direct their motions. This space is completely
empty or at least as good as empty; therefore it must once have been
constituted differently and been filled with matter sufficiently powerful to transmit motion onto all the heavenly bodies contained in it and
to make it consonant with its own and thus with that of all the others,
and after the attraction had purified all the above-mentioned spaces and
assembled all the dispersed matter in particular lumps, the planets, with
the motions once impressed on them, must then continue their orbits
freely and unchanged in a non-resisting space. The reasons for the prob- 1:263
ability first proposed certainly require this concept, and because there
is no third possibility between these two cases, it may be regarded with
an excellent kind of approval that elevates it above the appearance of a
hypothesis. One might, if one wished to be expansive, ultimately arrive
at the framework I propose to present of the origin of the universeq
by pursuing on one’s own a series of conclusions following from one
another in the way of a mathematical method with all the splendour this
involves and with even greater lustre than the presentation of physical
matters generally tends to display; however I would prefer to present
my opinions in the form of a hypothesis and leave it to the insight of
the reader to examine their worthiness rather than to make their validity
suspect by the illusion of a fallacious argument and, by convincing the
ignorant, to lose the approval of the experts.
I assume that when all matter of which the spheres that constitute our
solar system, all the planets and comets, consist, was dissolved into its
elementary basic material at the beginning of all things, it occupied the
entire space of the universer in which these formed bodies now orbit.
This state of nature, even if one considers it in and for itself without
regard to any system, appears to be the simplest that could follow upon
nothingness. At that time, nothing had formed yet. The arrangement
of heavenly bodies distant from one another, their distance moderated
by attraction, and their shape that derives from the equilibrium of the
assembled matter, are a later state. Nature as it bordered directly on
q Weltgebaude ¨ r Weltgebaude ¨
227
creation, was as raw, as unformed as possible. However, even in the
essential properties of the elements that make up chaos, the characteristic
of that perfection can be felt that they have from their origin, in that
their essence is a consequence of the eternal idea of divine reason. The
simplest, the most universal properties that appear to have been designed
without any intention, matter that seems to be merely passive and in need
of forms and arrangement, has, in its simplest state, an endeavour to form
itself into a more perfect state by a natural development. However, the
difference in the kinds of elements contributes the greatest part to the
1:264 regulation of nature and the formation from chaos by which the state of
rest that would prevail under a universal equality among the dispersed
elements, is eliminated and the chaos in the points of the more strongly
attracting particles begins to form. The species of this basic material are
without doubt infinitely varied judging by the immeasurability nature
shows in all directions. For that reason, those with the greatest specific
density and attractive force, which, on their own, occupy less space and
are also less common, will, with the same distribution throughout the
space of the world, be more widely dispersed than the lighter types.
Elements of 1,000 times greater specific mass are a thousand, perhaps
a million times more dispersed than those lighter by the same measure.
And since these gradations have to be thought of as being as infinite as
possible, the former type of dispersed elements will be distant by a so
much greater distance from one another as the latter, just as there can
be bodily constituents of one type that exceeds another in density in the
same measure as a sphere that has been described with the radius of the
solar system does another that has a diameter of one thousandth of a
line.34
In a space filled in such a way, universal rest lasts only a moment. The
elements have essential forces to put each other into motion and they are
a source of life for themselves. Matter immediately endeavours to form
itself. The dispersed elements of the denser type collect all the matter
of lesser specific weight from a sphere around themselves by means of
attraction, but they themselves, together with the matter they have united
within themselves, collect at those points where particles of even greater
density are found, and these collect in the same way at yet denser ones
and so forth. By following this self-forming nature in thought through
the entire space of chaos, one will easily realize that all consequences
of this activity would ultimately consist of the composition of various
lumps, which would, after they had completed their formation, remain
at rest and eternally unmoving because of the equality of attraction.
Nature, however, has still other forces in store which are expressed
primarily when matter is dissolved into its particles, by which forces
1:265 they can repel one another and, by their conflict with the attractive
force, bring about that motion that is, as it were, a continuous life in
228
nature.35 Through this repulsive force, which is revealed in the elasticity
of vapours, in the emission of strong-smelling bodies, and in the dispersion of all spirituous matter, and which is an undisputed phenomenon of
nature, the elements descending to their attraction points are deflected
from the straight line of their motion to one side, and the vertical descent
ultimately changes into orbital motions encompassing the centre point
of the descent.36 In order to understand clearly the formation of the
universe,s we shall now limit our observation from the infinite sum total
of nature to one particular system, such as the one belonging to our Sun.
After we have considered its creation, we shall proceed in a similar manner to the origin of the higher world orders and be able to summarize
the infinity of the whole of creation in one doctrine.
If, accordingly, in a very large space, there is one point at which
the attraction of the elements present there has a greater effect than
elsewhere around it, then the basic materialt of the elementary particles dispersed all around will descend to this point. The first effect of
this universal descent is the formation of a body in this centre point
of attraction, which grows, so to speak, from an infinitely small seed
in rapid steps,37 but at precisely the same rate as this mass increases, it
also moves the surrounding particles with greater force to unite with it.
When the mass of this central body has grown to the extent that the
velocity with which it attracts the particles from great distances, is bent
sideways by the weak degrees of repulsion by which the particles hinder each other, and changes into sideways motions that are capable of
encompassing the central body in a circle through centrifugal force,u
then great eddies of particles are created, each of which describes its
own curved line as a result of the combination of attractive force and
the turning force directed sideways, which types of orbits all intersect
each other, for which their great dispersion in this space gives them
room.38 These motions that are in conflict with one another in many
ways, however, naturally strive to bring themselves into line with each
other, that is, into a state in which one motion is as little hindrance to the
other as possible. This occurs, firstly, by the particles of one restricting 1:266
the motion of the other until they are all moving in the same direction;
secondly, that the particles restrict their vertical motion, by which they
approach the centre of attraction until they are all as it were horizontal,
that is, moving in parallel orbits with the Sun as the centre point until
they no longer traverse each other and maintain themselves eternally in
free orbits at the height at which they hover because of the equality of
the tangential forcev with the descending force, so that ultimately only
s Weltbau
t Grundstoff
u Centerfliehkraft
v Schwungskraft
229
those particles remain floating in the area of the space that have attained
a speed through their descent and, through the resistance of the others,
a direction such that they can continue a free orbital motion.39 In this
state, where all particles move in one direction and in parallel circles,
namely in free orbital motion around the central body by means of the
tangential forcesw they have attained, the conflict and the convergence
of the elements is resolved and everything is in the state of least interaction. This is the natural result into which matter, in all cases when
it is involved in conflicting motions, is placed. It is clear therefore that
of the dispersed particles a large number must arrive at such precise
determinations by the resistance through which they seek to bring one
another to this state, although an even much greater number does not
arrive at it and merely serves to augment the lump of the central body
into which they descend, since they cannot freely maintain themselves at
the height at which they hover, but they transect the circles of the lower
ones and finally lose all motion through their resistance. This body at
the centre point of attraction, which according to the above has become
the main piece of the planetary structure through the quantity of its collected matter, is the Sun, even though at that time it does not yet have
the flaming heat that breaks out upon its surface after its formation is
entirely complete.
It should be noted further that, since all the elements of self-forming
nature are thus, as proved above, moving in one direction around the
centre point of the Sun, in such orbits directed to a single region that run
on a single common axis as it were, the rotation of fine matter cannot
continue in this manner, because in accordance with the laws of central
1:267 motion, all orbits must transect the centre point of attraction with the
plane of their orbits, but among all these orbits running in one direction
around a common axis, there is only one that transects the centre point
of the Sun, for which reason all matter rushes from both sides of this
axis drawn in thought to that circle which goes through the axis of the
rotation exactly in the centre point of the common descent. Which circle
is the plane of reference of all the floating elements, around which they
accumulate as much as possible and leave the regions distant from this
area empty; for those that cannot come so close to the area to which
everything is crowding, will not always be able to maintain themselves
in the places where they hover, but rather will bring about their ultimate
fall to the Sun by bumping into the elements floating around.
If, therefore, one considers this basic materialx of the universey floating around in such a state into which it places itself by attraction and
by the mechanical result of the general laws of resistance, then we see a
w Schwungskrafte ¨
x Grundstoff
y Weltmaterie
230
space contained between two areas not far removed from one another,
in the middle of which there is the general plane of reference, spread
out from the centre point of the Sun into unknown distances, in which
all the included particles, each according to its height and the attraction prevalent there, carry out measured circular motions in free orbits
and thus, since in this state they hinder each other as little as possible
anymore, would always remain in that state, if the attraction of these
particles of the basic material among each other did not begin to have
its effect and bring about new formations which are the seeds of planets
that are to come into being. For since the elements moving around the
Sun in parallel circles, taken in not too great a difference of their distance from the Sun, are almost at rest in respect to each other because
of the equality of their parallel motion, the pull of the elements found
there immediately has a considerable effect,* through superior specific
attraction, of beginning the accumulation of the next particles for the 1:268
formation of a body, which extends its attraction in accordance with the
degree of the growth of its lump and moves the elements from a large
distance to constitute it.
The formation of the planets in this system has this advantage over
any other possible doctrine: that the origin of the masses also represents
the origin of the motions and the position of the orbits at one and the
same time; indeed, that even the deviations from the greatest precision
in these determinations, as well as the agreements, are revealed from
one perspective. The planets are formed out of particles that have precise motions as circular orbitsz at the height at which they hover: thus
the masses that are constituted by them will continue exactly the
same motions in exactly the same degree in exactly the same direction. This is sufficient to have insight into why the motion of the planets
is approximately circular in form and their orbits are on one plane. Indeed
they would be completely precise circles† if the distance out of which they
* The beginning of forming planets cannot be sought in Newtonian attraction alone. In
the case of a small particle of such exceptional fineness, it would be too slow and too
weak. One would rather say that in this space, the first formation would occur through
the flowing together of some elements which unite according to the ordinary laws of
combination, until the lump that resulted from it has gradually grown so much that
Newtonian attractive force would enable it to become ever larger through its activity
in the distance.
† The measured orbital motion actually affects only the planets near the Sun: for at the
great distances where the furthest planets or even the comets were formed, it can easily
be supposed that because the descending motion of the basic material is much weaker
there, the enormity of the spaces in which they are dispersed is also greater, the elements
there deviate by themselves from the circular motion and thus must be the cause of the
bodies formed from them.
z Zirkelkreisen
231
accumulate the elements for their formation were very small and the differences in their motions were thus very slight. But since for this it is
necessary for there to be a wide circumference to form a dense lump of
a planet out of the fine basic matter that is so very much dispersed in
the heavens: thus the difference between the distances of these elements
from the Sun and thus also the difference between their velocities is no
longer insignificant, so that it would be necessary that, in order for the
equality of the central forces and the circular velocity to be maintained
for the planets with this difference between the motions, the particles
1:269 that accumulate on it from different levels with different motions, would
replace the deficits of each other precisely, which, though it in fact happens fairly precisely,* nonetheless, since there is something missing in
this complete replacement, affects the decline of the orbital motions and
the eccentricity. It is equally clear that, even though the orbits of all the
planets really ought to be in one plane, we do nonetheless encounter a
slight deviation in this because, as already mentioned, the elementary
particles, since they are as close as possible to the general maintenance
plane of their motions, nonetheless include some space on either side
of it; since it would then be altogether too great a coincidence if all the
planets were to begin forming exactly in the centre between these two
sides in the plane of the relation, which would already cause some inclination of their orbits towards each other, even though the endeavour of
the particles to limit this deviation as much as possible from both sides,
allows it only narrow limits. One should therefore not be surprised to
come upon the most precise determinations here no more than in all
things of nature because in general the large number of different circumstances that form part of any aspect of nature does not permit a
measured regularity.
chapter two.
Concerning the varying density of the planets and the ratios of
their masses.
We have shown that the particles of the elementary basic material, since
they were, considered by themselves, equally dispersed throughout
the universe, have, through their descent towards the Sun, remained
hovering in those places where the velocity they attained in their fall was
1:270 equal to the attractive force and thus their direction was deflected vertically against the orbital ray such as it should be with an orbital motion.
* For the particles from the region nearer the Sun, which have a greater orbital velocity
than is required where they accumulate on the planet, replace the velocity that is lacking
in the particles further from the Sun that are incorporated into the same body, in order
to move in a circular manner at the distance of the planet.
232
However, if we now consider particles of differential specific density at
the same distance from the Sun, then those of greater specific weight
penetrate further through the resistance of the others to the Sun and
are not deflected as quickly from their path as the lighter ones, with the
result that their motion becomes circular only with a greater proximity
to the Sun. The elements of the lighter kind, by contrast, which are more
readily deflected from the straight line of their fall, will change into
orbital motions before they have penetrated so deeply to the centre, and
will thus remain hovering at greater distances, and cannot penetrate so
far through the filled space of the elements without their motion
through these being weakened by their resistance and they are unable
to achieve the high degree of velocity required for orbiting closer to the
centre;40 thus, after the equality of the motions has been attained, the
specifically lighter particles will orbit at greater distances from the Sun,
while the heavier ones will be found at closer distances and the planets
formed by them will therefore be of a denser kind and closer to the Sun
than those forming themselves out of the accumulation of those atoms
further from it.
It is thus a kind of a static law that determines the heights of the
matter of the universe in inverse ratio to their density. Even so it is
just as easy to comprehend that any height need not admit only particles of the same specific density. Of the particles of a certain specific
type, those that have descended to their orbit from greater distances,
remain hovering at greater distances from the Sun and attain the moderation of their descent necessary for a constant orbit at a greater distance, while those whose original position was nearer the Sun at the
universal distribution of matter in the chaos will come closer to the
Sun for their orbit, even if they are not necessarily denser. And therefore since the positions of the materials in respect of the centre point
of their descent are determined not only by their specific weight but
also by their original positions in the first state of rest in nature, it is
easy to consider that their very different types will come together at any 1:271
given distance from the Sun, remaining hanging41 there, but that generally the denser matter will be encountered closer to the centre point than
further from it, and that therefore, even though the planets will be a mixture of very different matters, their masses must be altogether denser the
closer they are to the Sun, and of lower density the greater their distance
from it.
In consideration of this law of the density of planets, our system shows
an excellent perfection compared to all those concepts people have had,
or might yet have, about their cause. Newton, who had established the
density of some planets through calculation, believed he had found the
cause of their ratio arranged according to distance in the propriety of
God’s choice and in the motivations of his final purpose: because the
233
planets closer to the Sun have to tolerate greater heat from it and the
more distant ones have to manage with fewer degrees of warmth, which
appears not to be possible if the planets closer to the Sun were not
of a denser kind and the more distant ones not composed of lighter
matter.42 However, it does not take a great deal of reflection to have
insight into the inadequacy of such an explanation. A planet, for instance
our Earth, is composed of very greatly differing types of matter; among
these it was necessary that the lighter ones, which are penetrated more
and moved by the same effect of the Sun and whose composition has a
ratio to the warmth by which its rays have their effect, had to be spread
out on the surface; but it does not follow from this that the mixture of
the other matter in the whole of the lump must have the same ratio;
since the Sun has no effect upon the inside of the planet at all. Newton
feared that if the Earth were lowered into the rays of the Sun as far
as the distance of Mercury, it would burn like a comet and its matter
would not have sufficient resistance to fire not to be dispersed by this
heat. But how much more would the matter of the Sun itself, which is
four times lighter than that of which the Earth consists, be destroyed
by this heat, or why is the Moon twice as dense as the Earth when it
orbits at the same distance from the Sun? Thus one cannot ascribe the
1:272 proportionate densities to their relation to the Sun’s warmth without
involving oneself in the greatest contradictions. Rather one will see that
a cause that distributes the positions of the planets according to the
density of their lumps, would have to have a ratio to the interior of
its matter and not the surface; regardless of this consequence which it
determined, it must also allow a difference in the matter in that same
heavenly body and establish this relationship of density only in terms of
the whole of the composition; and I leave it to the insight of the reader
to judge whether there is any law of statics other than that advanced in
our doctrines that will do justice to all of this.
The ratio of the densities of the planets involves another issue that
confirms the correctness of our doctrine by way of the complete correspondence with the explanation outlined earlier. That heavenly body
that stands at the centre of other spheres orbiting around it is usually of
a lighter kind than the body orbiting next to it. The Earth in relation
to the Moon and the Sun in relation to the Earth evince such a ratio
of their densities. According to the conception we have presented, this
is a necessary state of affairs. For, since the lower planets were formed
mainly from the remainders of elementary matter, which by the advantage of its density have been able to make their way to such a proximity
to the centre point with the requisite degree of velocity, whereas the
body at the centre point itself has been piled together without any difference out of the materials of all available types which have not attained
234
their motion in accordance with law,a among which since the lighter
materials constitute the largest proportion, it is easy to see that, because
the heavenly body, or bodies, orbiting nearest to the centre point contains within itself as it were a separation of denser types, while the central
body contains an undifferentiated mixture, the former will be of a denser
kind than the latter. In fact, the Moon is twice as dense as the Earth and
the Earth is four times denser than the Sun, which, according to what
we can suppose, will be surpassed in yet greater degrees of density by
the still lower planets, Venus and Mercury.43
We now turn our attention to the ratio that the masses of the heavenly bodies ought to have according to our doctrine in comparison to 1:273
their distances in order to test the result of our system against Newton’s
infallible calculations. We do not need many words to make it comprehensible that the central body must always be the main part of its system
and that therefore the Sun must be much greater in mass than all the
planets, just as this will apply to Jupiter in relation to its satellites and to
Saturn in relation to its own. The central body is formed from the precipitation of all the particles out of the entire area of its sphere of attraction,
which have not been able to obtain the most precise determination of
the orbital motion and the close relationship to the common plane and
of which there must be a very much greater number than the latter. To
apply this observation primarily to the Sun: if we were to wish to estimate
the extent of the space by which the orbiting particles that served the
planets as their basic matter have deviated from the common plane at
the furthest point, then we may assume it to be approximately somewhat
larger than the extent of the greatest deviation of the planetary orbits
from one another. Now, however, their greatest inclination towards one
another, when they deviate in both directions from the common plane,
is hardly seven and a half degrees. We can therefore represent all the
matter from which the planets were formed as having been dispersed
in that space which was between two surfaces encompassing an angle of
seven and a half degrees from the perspective of the centre point of the
Sun. Now, a zone of seven and a half degrees breadth in the direction of
the greatest orbit is a little more than one seventeenth part of the surface
area of the sphere, that is, the physical space between the two planes that
excise the spheroidal space in the size of the aforementioned angle is
somewhat more than one seventeenth part of the physical content of the
whole sphere. According to this hypothesis, therefore, all the matter that
was required for the formation of the planets, constitutes approximately
one seventeenth part of that matter which the Sun has accumulated from
both sides for its composition from the distance of the outermost planet.
a gesetzmaßige Bewegung ¨
235
This central body, however, has an advantage of the lump as against the
total content of all planets which is not in a ratio of 17:1, but of 650 to 1,
as determined by Newton’s calculations;44 but it is also easy to see that in
1:274 the higher spaces above Saturn, where planetary formations either cease
or are rare, where only a few cometic bodies have formed,45 and where
primarily the motions of the basic matter, in that they are not suited
to attaining that equality of the central powers governed by the laws of
nature, as in the areas close to the centre, precipitate only an almost universal descent to the centre point and supplement the Sun with all the
matter from such widely distributed spaces that, I say, for these reasons
the lump of the Sun would have to reach such a particularly large size of
mass.
However, to compare the planets in respect of their masses, we note
firstly that, in accordance with the method of formation shown above,
the quantity of matter in the composition of a planet depends on its
distance from the Sun: 1) because the Sun limits the sphere of attraction
of a planet by its own attraction, but it does not limit the more distant
ones as much as the closer ones under the same circumstances; 2) because
the orbits from which all the particles have accumulated to constitute a
more distant planet are described by a larger radius, that is, more basic
matter than is contained in the smaller orbits; 3) because for the reason
just given, the width between the two planes of the largest deviation is
greater at greater heights at the same number of degrees than in smaller
ones. By contrast, this advantage of the more distant planets compared
to the closer ones is limited by the fact that the particles closer to the
Sun will be of a more dense kind and, by all appearances, less spread out
than those at a great distance; it is, however, easy to appreciate that the
former advantages for the formation of large masses nonetheless greatly
surpass the latter limitations and that altogether, the planets that form
at a great distance from the Sun must receive greater masses than those
closer. This, then, takes place insofar as we imagine the formation of a
planet only in the presence of the Sun; but if we have several planets form
at varying distances, then one will limit the extent of the attraction of
the other by its sphere of attraction, and this creates an exception to the
above law. For that planet which is close to another of exceptional mass,
1:275 will lose a great deal of the sphere of its formation and thus become
much smaller than the ratio of its distance from the Sun alone would
require. Although, therefore, in general the planets are of greater mass
the further they are from the Sun, as altogether Saturn and Jupiter, the
two main elements of our system, are in fact the largest because they are
most distant from the Sun, there are nonetheless departures from this
analogy, in which however the characteristic of the general formation,
which we assert for all heavenly bodies, shines forth at all times: namely
that a planet of exceptional size will deprive those planets nearest to it on
236
both sides of the mass that would be due to them because of their distance
from the Sun, by absorbing part of the matter that should have belonged
to their formation. In fact, Mars, which should be larger than the Earth
given its position, has lost some of its mass through the attractive force
of Jupiter which is so large and close to it; and Saturn itself, even though
it has an advantage over Mars on account of its distance, has not been
entirely free from suffering a considerable loss from Jupiter’s attraction,
and it seems to me that Mercury owes the exceptional smallness of its
mass not only to the attraction of the mighty Sun so close to it, but also
to the proximity of Venus, which, if we were to compare its density with
its size, must be a planet of considerable mass.
Now since everything fits together in as excellent a manner as one
might wish to confirm the adequacy of a mechanical doctrine at the origin of the universe and the heavenly bodies, we will now, by estimating
the space in which the basic matter of the planets was spread before their
formation, consider to what degree of thinness this intermediate space
was then filled, and with what freedom, or with how few hindrances, the
floating particles were able to behave in it according to the laws of their
motion. If the space that encompassed all the matter of the planets was
contained in that part of the sphere of Saturn which, viewed from the
centre point of the Sun, was encompassed between two planes separated
from each other at all heights by seven degrees and was therefore one seventeenth part of the whole sphere that one can describe with the radius
of the height of Saturn, then, to calculate the thinness of the planetary 1:276
basic matter when it filled this space, we will assume the height of Saturn
to be only 100,000 diameters of the Earth; therefore the whole sphere
of the orbit of Saturn will exceed the volume of the Earth’s sphere 1000
billion46 times,47 of which, if we assume only a twentieth instead of a
seventeenth part, the space in which the elementary basic material hovered, must still exceed the volume of the Earth’s sphere 50 billion times.
Now if we assume with Newton that the mass of all the planets and their
satellites is 1/650 of that of the Sun, then the ratio of the Earth, which
is only 1/169282 of it, to the total mass of all planetary matter is 1 to
276 1/2, and if one were then to bring all this matter to the same specific
density of the Earth, a body would be created that would occupy a space
277 1/2 times that of the Earth. If, therefore, we assume the density
of the Earth in its entire lump to be not much greater than the
density of the firm matter we find under the topmost surface, as the
properties of the figure of the Earth require, and assume that these
upper materials are approximately 4 to 5 times denser than water and
water 1,000 times heavier than air,48 then the matter of all planets, if it
were spread out to the thinness of the air, would occupy a space almost
14 times a hundred thousand times greater than the Earth. This space,
compared with the space in which, according to our assumption, all the
237
matter of the planets was spread out, is thirty million times smaller:
therefore the dispersion of the matter of the planets in this space also
constitutes a thinning as many times greater than that which the particles of our atmosphere have. In fact, this magnitude of dispersion, as
incredible as it may seem, was neither unnecessary nor unnatural. It had
to be as great as possible to permit all freedom of motion to the hovering particles almost as though they were in empty space, and to reduce
infinitely the resistance they can offer to each other, but they were also
able to take on such a state of thinning by themselves, which one may
not doubt if one knows a little of the expansion that matter suffers when
it is transformed into vapours, or if, to remain with the heavens, one
1:277 considers the thinning of matter in the tails of comets, which, despite so
enormous a thickness of their cross-section, which probably exceeds the
diameter of the Earth a hundred times, are nonetheless so transparent
that small stars can be seen through them,49 which our air does not permit when it is illuminated by the Sun at a height that is many thousand
times smaller.
I shall conclude this chapter by adding an analogy which, all by itself,
is able to raise the present theory of the mechanical formation of the
heavenly bodies from the probability of a hypothesis to a certainty. If
the Sun is made up of the particles of the same basic material of which
the planets have constituted themselves, and if the only difference lies
in the fact that in the former the matter of all types has been gathered
without any differentiation, while in the latter they have been distributed
at various distances in accordance with the constitution of the density
of their varieties by their very own attractive forces,50 and so if the matter of all the planets together is considered in its entire distribution, a
density will have to emerge which is almost equivalent to the density of
the Sun’s body. Now this necessary consequence of our system finds a
fortunate confirmation in the comparison that Herr von Buffon,51 that
so deservedly famous philosopher, has proposed between the densities of
the entire planetary matter and of the suns; he found a similarity between
the two of them that was 640 to 650. If the necessary consequences that
result from a doctrine in a non-artificial way are confirmed by the actual
relations in nature, then can we believe that mere arbitrariness has caused
this agreement between theory and observation?
chapter three.
On the eccentricity of the planetary orbits and the
origin of comets.
It is not possible to create a special type of heavenly bodies out of the
comets that is entirely distinct from the family of planets. Nature acts
238
here, as elsewhere, through imperceptible gradations, and, by passing 1:278
through all stages of change, it connects the distant properties to the
closer ones by means of a chain of links. Eccentricity in the planets is a
consequence of the deficiency in that effort by which nature strives to
make the planetary motions like a circle, which, however, it can never
attain completely because various circumstances get in the way, but from
which it deviates more at greater distances than at smaller ones.
This determination leads, through all possible stages of eccentricity, via a continuous ladder from the planets finally to the comets and
although this connection appears to be severed at Saturn by a great
chasm, which completely separates the cometic family from the planets,
we did note in the first part that there may well be other planets beyond
Saturn, which approach the orbits of the comets more closely by a greater
deviation from the circular nature of the orbits, and that it is only as a
result of a lack of observation, or of the difficulty of observation, that
this relationship is not just as visible to the eye as it has been shown to
be for the understanding.
In the first chapter of this part we already cited one cause that may
make eccentric the orbit of a heavenly body that is formed from the basic
material hovering about, even if one assumes that this possesses in all of
its places forces that correspond exactly to circular motion. For, since
the planet gathers them from heights that are very distant from each
other where the velocities of the orbits are different, they encounter
it with different degrees of inherent orbital motion that deviate from
the degree of velocity appropriate to the distance of the planet and in
this way give it an eccentricity to the extent that these varying impressions of the particles are unable to replace completely one another’s
deviation.
If the eccentricity had no other cause, then it would be moderate
everywhere: it would be less in planets that are smaller and more distant
from the Sun than in those that are closer and larger: that is, if one were to
assume that the particles of the basic material really did previously have
precisely circular motions. Now, as these conditions do not correspond 1:279
to observation in that, as already noted, the eccentricity increases with
the distance from the Sun, and the smallness of the masses appears rather
to constitute an exception to the increase, as we see in the case of Mars,
so we are forced to restrict the hypothesis of the precise circular motion
of the particles of the basic material in such a way that we admit that they
come very close to this precise determination in those regions close to
the Sun but deviate from it more the further these elementary particles
have floated away from the Sun. Moderating the principle of free circular
motion of the basic material in this way is more appropriate to nature.
For, irrespective of the thinness of space that seems to leave them the
freedom to limit each other to the point of a perfectly balanced equality
239
of central forces, the causes, nonetheless, are no less considerable to
prevent this purpose of nature from reaching its fulfilment. The further
the dispersed parts of the original material are distant from the Sun, the
weaker the force that causes it to descend: The resistance of the lower
parts, which are to bend their fall sidewards and force it to arrange its
direction horizontally to the orbital ray, is reduced to the extent that
these sink away from under it, either to become incorporated into the
Sun, or to begin orbits in closer regions. The specific eminent lightness
of this higher matter does not permit them to arrange the falling motion
that is the ground of everything with the pressure that is required to
cause the resisting particles to give way; and perhaps that these distant
particles limit one another and finally reach this uniformity after a long
period: thus, small masses have already formed as the beginnings of so
many heavenly bodies which, because they condense out of weakly moved
matter, have only an eccentric motion by which they sink towards the
Sun and in so doing are increasingly bent away from a vertical fall by
incorporating faster moving particles, but ultimately do remain comets
when those spaces in which they have formed have become purified
and empty by descending to the Sun or by condensing into separate
lumps. This is the cause of the eccentricity of the planets increasing with
1:280 their distance from the Sun and of those heavenly bodies that are called
comets because they greatly exceed the former in this property. It is
true that there are still two exceptions that violate the law of eccentricity
increasing with the distance from the Sun, and these may be observed
with the two smallest planets of our system, Mars and Mercury; but in
the case of the former, the cause is presumably the proximity of the great
Jupiter, which, because it deprives Mars of the particles for its formation
by its attraction towards its side, leaving it mainly only room to expand
in the direction of the Sun, thus attains an excess of central force and
eccentricity. As concerns Mercury, however, the lowest and also most
eccentric of the planets, it is easy to see that, since the Sun does not
come anywhere close to the speed of Mercury in its axial rotation, the
resistance it offers to matter in the space around it would not deprive
the nearest particles of their central motion but could easily extend this
resistance as far as Mercury and in this way reduce its orbital speed
considerably.
Eccentricity is the principal distinguishing feature of comets. Their
atmospheres and tails, which expand when they approach the Sun due
to its heat, are only consequences of the former, even though in times
of ignorance they served as frightening images to announce imaginary
fates to the rabble. Those astronomers who devoted more attention to
the laws of motion than to the strangeness of their form, noticed a second
property that distinguishes the family of comets from that of the planets,
namely that they, unlike the others, are not bound to the zones of the
240
zodiac but arrange their orbits freely in all regions of the heavens. This
peculiarity has the same cause as the eccentricity. If the planets have
enclosed their orbits in the narrow regions of the zodiac because the
elementary matter near the Sun attains circular motions, which attempt
to cross the plane of reference at every orbit and will not allow the body
once formed to deviate from this plane, to which all matter strives from
both sides: therefore, the basic material of the spaces distant from the
centre point, which, moved weakly by attraction, cannot attain a free cir- 1:281
cular orbit, precisely for the same reason that creates eccentricity must
not be capable of consolidating itself at this level to the plane of reference of all planetary motion to maintain the bodies formed there in this
track; rather, the dispersed basic material, because it is not restricted to
a particular region as the lower planets are, will be formed into heavenly bodies just as easily on one side as on the other and far from the
plane of reference just as often as close to it. For this reason the comets
will come down to us from all regions with complete freedom; but those
whose place of first formation is not elevated much above the orbit of the
planets, will show less deviation from the boundaries of their orbits as
well as less eccentricity. This lawless freedom of the comets, in relation
to their deviations, increases with the distance from the centre point
of the system, and loses itself in the depths of the heavens in a total
absence of rotation, which leaves the bodies that are formed furthest
away to fall freely to the Sun and sets the last borders to the systematic
constitution.
In this outline of the motions of comets, I presuppose that for the most
part, they will have they same direction as that of the planets. For the
nearest comets this seems to me to be beyond doubt, and this uniformity
cannot be lost in the depths of the heavens before the point where the
elementary basic material in the greatest dullnessb of motion brings about
a rotation in any direction caused by, say, the descent, because the time
required to unify them in regards to direction through the community
of the lower motions, is, on account of the great distance, too long for
it to extend that far while the formation of nature in the lower regions
is taking place. There may therefore perhaps be comets that complete
their orbits in the opposite direction, that is from east to west, even
though, for reasons I would be reluctant to elaborate upon here, I would
almost be persuaded that of the 19 comets where this peculiarity has
been observed, optical illusions may have been the cause.
I must still note something about the masses of comets and about the 1:282
density of their material. For reasons adduced in the previous chapter,
in the upper areas of the formation of these heavenly bodies, greater
masses ought by rights to form in relation to the distance. And it is also
b Mattigkeit
241
credible that some comets are larger than Saturn and Jupiter; but it is
just not credible that this size of the masses will continue to increase
in this way. The dispersion of the basic material, the specific lightness
of its particles slow the formation in the most distant region of space;
its indeterminate spreading in the whole immeasurable extent of this
distance without any determination to become more condensed in the
direction of a particular plane, brings about many smaller formations
instead of a single considerable one and the lack of any central force
attracts the greater part of the particles down to the Sun without having
condensed into masses.
The specific density of the material of which the comets are formed
is of greater interest than the size of their masses. Presumably, since
they form in the uppermost region of the universe,c the particles of their
constituents are of the lightest type; and we cannot doubt that this is the
principal cause of the vaporous spheres and the tails that characterize
them in relation to other heavenly bodies. We cannot regard the effects
of the heat of the Sun as the principal cause of this dispersion of the
cometic matter into a vapour; some comets scarcely reach down to
the Earth’s orbit in their proximity to the Sun; many remain between
the orbit of the Earth and that of Venus and then return. If so moderate
a degree of heat dissolves and thins the materials on the surface of these
bodies to such an extent, then they must consist of the lightest matter,
which suffers greater thinning through heat than any other material in
all of nature.
Nor can we attribute these vapours that rise so frequently from the
comets to the heat that its body has retained from some earlier proximity to the Sun: for while it can be presumed that a comet, at the time
of its formation, has covered numerous orbits with greater eccentricity and that they have only gradually been decreased, the other planets,
of which we might suppose the same, do not exhibit this phenomenon.
1:283 They would, however, display it themselves if the kinds of the lightest
matter that are included in the constitution of the planet were present
as commonly as they are in the comets.
The Earth has something about it that may be compared to the dispersion of the cometic vapours and their tails.* The finest particles that
the Sun’s activity draws from its surface are concentrated around one of
its poles, when the Sun proceeds through half of its orbit towards the
opposite hemisphere. The smallest and most active particles that rise
up in the burning belt52 of the Earth, after they have reached a certain
height of the atmosphere, are forced by the activity of the Sun’s rays to
* These are the Northern Lights.
c Weltgebaude ¨
242
retreat to and to condense in those areas which are then turned away
from the Sun and buried in a long night, and so compensate the inhabitants of the Arctic for the absence of the great light, which sends the
effects of its warmth even at this distance. Precisely the same force of
the Sun’s rays that creates the Northern Lights would also bring about
a vapour circle with a tail if the finest and most fleeting particles were to
be found as commonly on Earth as they are on the comets.
chapter four.
Concerning the origin of the moons and the motion of the
planets around their axes.
A planet’s endeavour to form itself out of the surroundings of the elementary matter is at the same time the cause of its revolving around
its axis and brings about the moons that are to orbit around it. What
the Sun is to its planets on a large scale is represented on a smaller one
by a planet that has a widely dispersed sphere of attraction, namely the
main part of a system, the parts of which have been set in motion by
the attraction of the central body. As the planet forms, by moving the
particles of the basic material out of the entire surroundings to form it, it
will create circular motions out of all these sinking motions by means of
their reciprocal effects and indeed finally create such motions that will 1:284
adopt a common direction and of these one part receives an appropriate
measured of the free orbit and in this limitation will find itself close to
a common plane. In this space, moons will form around it, just as the
main planets do around the Sun, if the distance of the attraction of such
heavenly bodies provides favourable circumstances for their creation.
What has been said in addition about the origin of the solar system can
be applied with sufficient similarity to the system of Jupiter and that of
Saturn. The moons will all have arranged the circles of their orbits in
one direction and almost in one plane and this, indeed, for the same
reasons as determine the analogy on the large scale. But why do these
satellites move in their common direction in the direction in which the
planets move rather than in any other? Their orbits are, after all, not
created by the circular motions: They merely recognize the attraction of
the main planet as the cause, and in consideration of this, all directions
are equivalent; some merely arbitrary thing will decide the direction out
of all those possible that the descending motion of the material will take
in orbits. In fact, the orbit of the main planet does nothing to impress
any revolutions into the material that is to form the moons around it; all
the particles around the planet move in the same motion with it around
d Maßigung ¨
243
the Sun and are thus at rest relative to it. The attraction of the planet
alone does everything. But the circular motion which is to arise from
it, because in and of itself it is equivalent in relation to all directions,
requires only a small external determination to move in one direction
rather than another; and it receives this small degree of direction from
the advancement of the elementary particles which also orbit around
the Sun but with greater velocity and come into the planet’s sphere of
attraction. For this forces the particles nearer the Sun, which orbit with
a greater tangential force,e to depart from the direction of their track and
to elevate themselves above the planet in an oblong deviation. Because
they have a greater degree of velocity than the planet itself, when these
1:285 are brought to descend by its attraction, they impart to their straight fall
and also to the fall of the others a deviation from west to east and this
slight steering is all that is required to cause the orbit that the fall, brought
about by the attraction, takes on, to adopt this direction rather than any
other. For this reason, all the moons will coincide with the direction
of the orbit of the main planet. However, the plane of its path cannot
depart much from the plane of the planetary orbit, because the matter
from which they are formed is steered, for the same reason that we have
advanced about directions altogether, to its most precise determination,
namely the coincidence with the plane of the main orbits.
From all this one can see clearly under what circumstances a planet
might acquire satellites. Its attractive force must be great and consequently the extent of its sphere of activity must be extensive, so that
the particles, moved by a lengthy fall towards the planet, regardless of
what the resistance cancels out, can attain a sufficient velocity for a free
orbit and in addition there must be enough material present in the area
for the formation of the moons, which cannot occur if the attraction is
too small. Therefore only planets with a great mass and at a great distance are endowed with satellites. Jupiter and Saturn, the two largest and
most distant of the planets have the largest number of moons. The Earth,
which is much smaller than they, has only received one; and Mars, which
would deserve some share in this advantage on account of its distance
goes empty-handed because its mass is so small.
It gives one some pleasure to observe how the same attraction of the
planet that supplied the material for the formation of the moons and, at
the same time, determined their motion, also extends to its own body
and that this, through the same action by which it forms itself, gives
itself a rotation around its axis in the general direction of west to east.
The particles of the falling basic material, which, as mentioned above,
acquire a general motion from west to east, fall for the most part onto
the surface of the planet and are mixed with its lump, because they do
e Schwung
244
not have the degrees requisite to maintain themselves in free suspension
in orbital motions. Now when they combine with the planet, being parts 1:286
of it, they must continue the same rotation in the same direction that
they had before they were united with it. And because it can be seen
from the above in any case that the number of particles that the lack of
the requisite motion causes to crash onto the central body must greatly
exceed the number of those others which have been able to acquire the
requisite degree of velocity, it is easy to understand why this body will
not have nearly the velocity to achieve a balance between the gravity
on its surface and the centrifugal force, but nonetheless the velocity
will be much larger with planets of great mass and far away than with
small and close ones. In fact Jupiter has the fastest axial rotation that we
are aware of53 and I do not know according to what system one could
make it compatible with a body whose lump exceeds all others unless one
considers its motions as themselves the effect of that attraction which this
celestial body exercises in accordance with the measure of this very lump.
If the axial rotation were an effect of an external cause, then Mars would
have to have a faster one than Jupiter, because the very same motive
force moves a smaller body more than a larger one, and, in addition,
one would rightly be astonished at this, how, since all motions decrease
the further they are from the centre point, the velocities of the rotations
increase with the same distances and in the case of Jupiter are even three
and a half times greater than its annual motion itself could be.
Since one is therefore forced to recognize the same cause in the daily
rotation of the planets that is the universal source of motion in nature,
namely attraction, this manner of explanation will validate its legitimacy
by the natural prerogative of its basic concept and by the effortless consequences thereof.
If, however, it is the formation of a body itself that causes rotation
around an axis, then it stands to reason that all spheres in the universef
must have it; but why does the Moon not have it, which appears to some,
albeit wrongly, to have that kind of rotation by which it always shows
the same side to the earth because of a kind of excess weight of one of its
hemispheres rather than from an actual motiong of revolution? Could it 1:287
be that it once rotated more rapidly around its axis and has since, for I
know not what reason, slowed down to this slight and definite remainder?
One has only to answer this question in relation to one of the planets
to see that the result applies to all. I shall save this solution for another
occasion54 because it is necessarily related to the topic set for the prize
by the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin for 1754.
f Weltbau g Schwung
245
Any theory seeking to explain the origin of rotations must also be
capable of deducing the position of their axes in relation to the plane
of their orbits from the same causes. We have reason to wonder why
the equator of daily rotation is not in the same plane as the surface of
the moons that orbit the same planet; because the same motion that has
determined the orbit of a satellite ought, by extending to the body of the
planet, also to bring about rotation around the axis and to give it the same
direction and position. Heavenly bodies that have no satellites orbiting
around them would nonetheless set themselves into an axial rotation
through the very same motion of particles that served as their material
and through the same law that restricted them to the plane of their
periodic orbit, which had to correspond to the direction of its plane of
orbit for the same reason. As a consequence of these causes, the axes of all
heavenly bodies would properly have to be vertical to the universal plane
of reference of the planetary system, which does not deviate far from the
ecliptic. They are, however, vertical only in the two most significant parts
of this solar system, namely in the case of Jupiter and of the Sun; the
others whose rotations are known to us, incline their axes towards the
plane of their orbits, Saturn more than the others, and the Earth more
than Mars, whose axis is almost vertical to the ecliptic. The equator of
Saturn (insofar as we can consider it given by the direction of its ring)
inclines at an angle of 31 degrees to the plane of its orbit, while that of
1:288 the Earth is only 23 1/2. One can perhaps also attribute the cause of these
deviations to the difference in the motions of the material that have come
together to form the planet. In the direction of the plane of its orbit the
principal motion of the particles was around its centre and the plane of
reference was there around which the elementary particles accumulated
in order to make the motion there as close to a circle as possible and to
accumulate material to form satellites, which never deviate far from the
orbit for this reason. If the planet had been formed for the most part
only of these particles, its axial rotation would have deviated from it at
its original formation only as little as the satellites which circle around
it; but it formed, as the theory has shown, more out of the particles that
descended on both sides and the number and velocity of which does not
appear to have been so completely balanced that one hemisphere may
not have received a slightly greater impulse of motion than the other
and therefore some deviation from its axis.
Despite these reasons, I am advancing this explanation only as a conjecture I do not trust myself to decide. My real opinion comes to this:
that the rotation of the planets around their axes in the original state
of their first formation coincided fairly exactly with the plane of their
annual orbit and that there were causes present to push this axis out
of its original position. A heavenly body changing from its first fluid
state into a solid state undergoes a great change in the regularity of its
246
surface when it forms completely in this way. The surface becomes firm
and hardened while the deeper matters have not yet sunk sufficiently in
accordance with their specific gravity;h the lighter types that were intermingled with their lumps, after they have separated out from the others,
finally move underneath the topmost crust that has become firm and create the great caves, the largest and most extensive of which, for reasons
that would take too long to adduce here, are to be found at or near the
equator, into which the aforementioned crust finally sinks and creates
all types of irregularities, mountains, and caves. Now, if the surface has
become uneven in this way, as evidently happened with the Earth, the
Moon, and Venus, then it can no longer achieve a rotational balancei in 1:289
its axial rotation on all sides. Some protruding parts of considerable mass,
which had nothing on the other side that could provide them a countereffect to their tangential force,j would then have had to shift the axis of
the rotation and strive to put it into a position such that all the matter
remains in balance. Therefore, the very same cause that changed the
surface of a heavenly body from a level state to broken-off irregularities
during its complete formation, this universal cause has necessitated some
change in the original position of the axis of all the heavenly bodies that
can be observed clearly enough with a telescope. This change, however,
has its limits so that it will not deviate too far. As already mentioned, the
irregularities are generated more near the equator of a rotating heavenly sphere than far from it; towards the poles, they disappear almost
entirely, the causes of which I propose to explain on another occasion.
For this reason the masses protruding furthest above the even surface
will be found near the equinoctial circle and as these strive to approach
the circle through the advantage of tangential force,k they will be able
to raise the axis of the heavenly body at most by only a few degrees from
a position vertical to the plane of its orbit. As a consequence, a heavenly
body that is not yet fully formed will still retain this right-angled position of its axis to its orbit, which it will perhaps change only over the
course of many centuries. Jupiter appears to be in this state still. The
advantage of its mass and size, the lightness of its matter have forced it
to overcome the firm state of its matter several centuries later than other
heavenly bodies. Perhaps the interior of its lump is still in the motion
of lowering the parts of its constituents to the centre in accordance with
their mass and by separating the thinner types from the heavier ones to
overcome the state of firmness. In this state of affairs its surface cannot
yet appear calm. Devastation and ruins rule there. Even the telescope has
assured us of this. The appearance of this planet is constantly changing
while the Moon, Venus, and the Earth retain theirs unchanged. Also,
h Schwere
i das Gleichgewicht des Umschwunges
j Schwung
k Schwung
247
1:290 one can probably rightly imagine the completion of the period of formation as being several centuries later in the case of a heavenly body that
surpasses our Earth in size by more than twenty thousand times and is
only a quarter as dense. When its surface has attained a calm condition,
then without doubt far greater irregularities than those that cover the
Earth will, related to the speedl of its rotation,m give its rotation that
constant position which the balance of forces on it will demand in a not
very long time.
Saturn, three times smaller than Jupiter, may have obtained an advantage of a more rapid formation ahead of Jupiter, perhaps because of its
greater distance; at least its much faster axial rotation and the large ratio
of its centrifugal forcen to the gravity on its surface (which is to be presented in the following chapter) will bring it about that the irregularities
presumably caused thereby on the surface will soon have been decisive
on the side of the superior force by a shift in the axis. I freely admit that
this part of my system, which is related to the position of the planetary
axes, is still incomplete and rather far from being subjected to geometric
calculations. I preferred to reveal this honestly rather than to detract
from the power the rest of the doctrine has to be convincing by having
recourse to all kinds of borrowed implausible reasons and thus giving
it a weak side. The following chapter can provide a confirmation of the
credibility of the whole hypothesis by which we have sought to explain
the motions of the universe.o
chapter five.
On the origin of Saturn’s ring and calculation of the daily
rotation of this planet from its ratios.55
Thanks to the systematic constitution in the universe,p its parts are connected by a gradual alteration of their properties, and one may assume
1:291 that a planet in the furthermost region of the universe would have approximately such determinations as the next comet might take on if it were
to be elevated to the family of planets through a reduction of its eccentricity. Accordingly, we shall consider Saturn in such a way as though it
had travelled numerous orbits with greater eccentricity in the manner
of cometic motion and had gradually been brought onto a track more
l Schnelligkeit
m Schwung
n Centerfliehkraft
o Weltbau
p Weltgebaude ¨
248
similar to a circle.* The heat it acquired when it was close to the Sun
raised from its surface the light material, which, as we know from the
previous chapters, is exceedingly thin on the highest heavenly bodies,
and lets it expand by slight degrees of heat. However, after the planet
had been brought to its current distance after numerous revolutions, in
such a temperate climate it gradually lost the heat it had acquired, and the
gases that continued to spread around it gradually ceased to rise as far as
into the tails. Nor did any new ones arise frequently enough to increase
the old ones; in short, the vapours that already surrounded it continued
to hover around it for reasons we shall give in a moment and retained for
it the characteristic of its former comet-like nature in a constant ring,
while its body emitted the heat and finally became a quiet and purified
planet. Now we shall reveal the secret that has enabled the heavenly body
to retain its risen vapours hovering freely, indeed to transform it from
an atmosphere spread out all around it into the shape of a ring at a distance all around. I am assuming that Saturn has had an axial rotation and
nothing more than this is needed to reveal the whole secret. No other
mechanismq than this single one has, by means of a direct mechanical
result, brought about the above-mentioned phenomenon for the planet
and I venture to assert that in all of nature, there are only a few things
that can be attributed to so comprehensible an origin as this peculiarity 1:292
of the heavens can be developed from the raw state of its first formation.
The vapours rising from Saturn had motion in themselves and continued it freely at the height to which they had risen and that they had
as parts at its axial rotation. Those particles that rose near the equator of
the planet must have had the fastest motion while the motion was weaker
further away towards the poles in proportion to the latitude of the place
from which they rose. The particles were assigned to the various heights
to which they rose according to the ratio of their specific gravity, but
only those particles were able to maintain the places of their distance in
a constantly free orbital motion whose distances, into which they had
been placed, required such a central force as they were able to achieve
with the velocity they had from the orbital motion; the remaining ones,
insofar as they cannot be brought to this precision by the interaction of
the others, must either depart from the sphere of the planet with the
excess motion, or else be forced to sink back onto the planet by a lack of
motion. The particles dispersed through the entire extent of the vapour
* Or, what may be more probable, that in its comet-like nature, which it still has about
it now thanks to its eccentricity, before its lightest surface matter had been completely
dispersed, it spread a cometic atmosphere.
q Triebwerk
249
sphere will seek, by means of the very same central laws, in the motion
of its revolution, to transect the equatorial plane of the planet from both
sides and they will accumulate there when they detain one another, by
meeting one another in this plane from both hemispheres; and because
I assume that the aforementioned vapours are the ones that the planet
sends up last in its cooling, all the dispersed vaporous matter will accumulate next to this plane in a narrow space and leave the spaces empty on
both sides. But in this new and changed direction, they will nonetheless
continue the same motion that maintains them hovering in free concentric orbits. In this way the vapour circle changes its shape, which
was a filled sphere, into the shape of an extended plane which coincides
exactly with Saturn’s equator; but for the same mechanical reasons, this
shape too must ultimately adopt the form of a ring, the outer edge of
which is determined by the effect of the Sun’s rays, which disperses and
removes those particles that have moved to a certain distance from the
1:293 centre point of the planet; this is the same effect as happens in the case
of comets and in this way it delineates the outer border of its circle of
vapour. The interior edge of this emerging ring is determined by the
ratio of the velocity of the planet at its equator. For, at the distance from
its centre where this velocity achieves a balance with the attraction of the
place is the greatest proximity in which the particles that have risen from
its body can describe circular orbits through the motion peculiar to the
axial rotation. The closer particles, because they require greater speed
for such an orbit, which they cannot have since the motion is no faster
even at the equator of the planet, will by this means acquire eccentric
orbits that cross each other, weaken each other’s motion, and finally all
crash onto the planet from which they had risen. Here we now see that
wondrously strange phenomenon, the sight of which has always filled
astronomers with admiration since it was first discovered and to discover
the cause of which no one has had even a probable hope, emerge in an
easy mechanical manner, free from all hypotheses. What has happened
to Saturn would, as can be seen from the above, happen just as regularly
to every comet that had sufficient axial rotation, if it were placed in a
constant height at which its body could gradually cool down. Even in
chaos, nature is productive of excellent developments when its forces
are left to themselves, and the ensuing formation brings with it such
glorious connections and harmonies for the common benefit of creation
that even in the eternal and immutable laws of its essential properties,
they reveal with unanimous certainty that great Being in which they,
as a result of their commonr dependence, combine in a total harmony.
Saturn has great advantages from its rings; it lengthens its day and lights
up the night under so many moons to such an extent that it would be
r gemeinschaftlichen
250
easy to forget the absence of the Sun there. But must one therefore deny
that the universal developments of matter in accordance with mechanical
laws has been able to bring about connections that have created benefits 1:294
for creatures with reason without requiring laws other than their universal determinations? All beings are related as a result of one cause, which
is the understanding of God; therefore they can have no consequences
other than those that include a representation of perfection in that very
same divine idea.
We shall now try to calculate the time of the axial rotation of this
heavenly body from the ratios of its ring in accordance with the above
hypothesis of its genesis. Because all motion of the particles of the ring
is a motion embodied by the axial rotation of Saturn on whose surface
they were placed, the most rapid motion of these particles coincides with
the fastest rotation that can be found on the surface of Saturn; that is,
the velocity with which the particles of the ring circle at the inside edge
is equal to what the planet has at its equator. However, this can easily be
found by seeking it in the velocity of one of Saturn’s satellites by taking
it in the ratio of the square root of the distances from the centre of the
planet. From the velocity calculated, the duration of Saturn’s rotation on
its axis follows directly; it is six hours twenty-three minutes and fifty-three
seconds.56 This mathematical calculation of an unknown motion of a
heavenly body, which is perhaps the only prediction of its kind in natural
science proper, still awaits confirmation by the observation of future
times. The telescopes known at present do not enlarge Saturn sufficiently
to enable us to discover the spots we can assume to be on its surface so
that we might see its rotation on its axis by their shifting. But telescopes
have perhaps not yet attained the perfection one might hope from them
and which the hard work and skill of the artisans seems to promise us.
If in future we were to give proof to our conjectures by observation,
what certainty would the theory of Saturn be given and what splendid
credibility would the whole system have that is based upon the same
reasons. The time of the daily rotation of Saturn also entails the ratio of
the centrifugal forcet of its equator to the gravity on its surface: this ratio 1:295
is 20:32. That is, gravity is only about 3/5th greater than the centrifugal
force.u So great a ratio necessarily causes a very considerable difference in
the diameters57 of this planet and one might be concerned that it would
have to emerge so large that observation of this planet, although magnified only a little by the telescope, would nonetheless show this only too
clearly, which does not occur in reality, and that there could therefore be
a detrimental effect on the theory. A thorough examination removes this
difficulty completely. According to Huygens’ hypothesis, which assumes
s Entwickelung
t fliehende Kraft
u Centerfliehkraft
251
that the gravity in the interior of a planet is the same throughout, the
difference of the diameters is in a ratio to the diameter of the equator
two times smaller than the centrifugal forcev has to the gravity at the
poles. For example, since in the case of Earth the centrifugal forcew of
the equator is 1/289th of the gravity at the poles, according to Huygens’
hypothesis58 the diameter of the equatorial plane must be 1/578th
greater than the Earth’s axis. The cause is this: since, according to the
assumption, the gravity in the interior of the Earth’s lump is as great at all
distances from the centre as on the surface, while the centrifugal forcex
decreases as it approaches the centre, it is not 1/289th of the gravity
everywhere but rather the whole decrease of gravity of the fluid column
in the equatorial plane for this reason amounts not to 1/289th but to
half of it, namely 1/578th. On the contrary, on Newton’s hypothesis,59
the centrifugal force,y which causes the axial rotation, has the same
ratio to the gravity of the place in the whole plane of the Equator to
the centre point; because, in the interior of the planet (if it is assumed
to be of uniform density throughout), this decreases with the distance
from the centre in the same proportion as the centrifugal force,z that
is, it is always 1/289th of the former. This causes a lightening of the
fluid column in the equatorial plane and also raises it by 1/289th,
which difference of the diameters is further increased, according to this
doctrine, by the shortening of the axis bringing about a convergence
of the parts to the centre, that is an increase in the gravity, while the
lengthening of the equatorial diameter results in a distancing of the
1:296 parts from the same centre and thus a decrease of its gravity and for this
reason increases the flattening of the Newtonian spheroid in such a way
that the difference of the diameters is raised from 1/289th to 1/250th.
For these reasons, the diameters of Saturn ought to stand in a greater
ratio to one another than 20 to 32; they ought to come close to a proportion of 1 to 2, a difference that is so great that even the least attention
could not fail to notice it, small though Saturn might appear in telescopes. However, from this it can be seen that the assumption of equal
density that seems to be fairly correctly applied to the Earth deviates
far too far from the truth for Saturn; which in itself is already probable for a planet the lump of which consists of the lightest materials for
the greatest part of its content and in its compositiona allows those of the
heavier kind much greater freedom in sinking to the centre in accordance
with their gravity than those heavenly bodies whose much denser matter
delays the deposition of the matter and allows them to solidify before
the sinking can take place. Thus, when we suppose that the density of
v Centerfliehkraft
w fliehende Kraft
x Centrifugalkraft
y Centerfliehkraft
z Centerfliehkraft
a Zusammensatz
252
the materials in Saturn’s interior increases as it approaches the centre,
the gravity no longer decreases in this ratio; rather the increasing density
compensates for the absence of the parts that are positioned above the
height of the point in the planet and do not contribute anything to its
gravityb by their attractive force.* If this particular density of the deepest
matters is very great, then in accordance with the laws of attraction, it
changes the gravity that decreases as it nears the centre of the interior
into an almost uniform one and brings the ratio of the diameters close
to Huygens’ ratio, which is always half of the ratio between the cen- 1:297
trifugal forcec and the gravity; consequently as these were to each other
as 2:3, the difference of the diameters of this planet will be not 1/3rd
but 1/6th of the equatorial diameter; this difference, finally, is hidden
due to the fact that Saturn, whose axis forms an angle of 31 degrees
to the plane of its orbit at all times, never shows its position towards
its equator, the way Jupiter does, which reduces the appearance of the
aforementioned difference by almost one third. Under such conditions
and especially in view of the great distance of this planet, one can easily
understand that the flattened shape of its body is not as easily visible as
one might think; nonetheless, astronomy, whose progress depends primarily on the perfection of its tools, will be put in a position to discover
so remarkable a property by their assistance, if I do not flatter myself
too much.
What I say about the figure of Saturn can to some extent serve as a
general remark concerning the doctrine of nature concerning the heavens. Jupiter, which according to a precise calculation has a ratio of gravity
to centrifugal forced at its equator of at least 9 1/4:1, ought to present
an even greater difference than 1/9 between its axis and the equatorial
diameter if its lump were of uniform density throughout, according to
Newton’s theorems.60 Cassini,61 however, found it to be only 1/16th and
Pound62 1/12th or 1/14th; all these different observations, which confirm the difficulty of this measurement by their differences, at least agree
in positing it as much smaller than it ought to be according to Newton’s
system, or rather according to his hypothesis of uniform density. And if
therefore one were to change the precondition of the uniform density
that causes such a great deviation of the theory from observation into
the much more probable one in which the density of the planetary lump
* For according to Newton’s laws of attraction, a body in the interior of a sphere is
attracted only by that part of it which has been described spherically around it at the
distance it is from the centre point. The concentric parts outside this distance, because
of the balance of their attractions that cancel each other out, add nothing to move the
body either towards the centre or away from it.
b Gravitat ¨
c Centrifugalkraft
d Centrifugalkraft
253
is supposed to increase towards its centre, one will not only justify the
observation in the case of Jupiter, but also, in the case of Saturn, a planet
much more difficult to measure, have a more distinct insight into the
cause of a lesser flattening of its spheroid body.
1:298 We have used the opportunity of the generation of Saturn’s ring to
take the bold step of determining by calculation the time of its axial
rotation, which telescopes are not able to discover. Let us add another
to this attempt at a physical prediction on this same planet which will
await the proof of its correctness from the more perfect tools of future
times.
In accordance with our assumption that the ring of Saturn is an accumulation of particles which, after they rose from the surface of this heavenly body as vapours, constantly maintain themselves freely in orbits at
the height of their distance by means of the tangential forcee they have
and continue from the axial rotation, so they do not have the same periodic revolutions at all distances from the centre; rather, their ratio is
as the square roots of the cubes of their distance if they are to maintain themselves hovering by the laws of the central forces.63 Now, the
time in which the particles of the inner edge complete their orbit is,
according to this hypothesis, about 10 hours and the orbital time of the
particles in the outer edge is 15 hours, after due calculation; that is, when
the lowest parts of the ring have completed their orbits three times,
the most distant ones have done so only twice. However, though we
might estimate the interference the particles exert against one another
in their great dispersion in the plane of the ring to be as low as we
like, it is probable that the slowness of the more distant particles in
each of their orbits gradually delays and holds up the faster moving
lower parts, while these must impress a part of their motion on the
higher parts for a more rapid orbit, which, if this interaction were not
ultimately interrupted, would continue until the higher and lower particles of the ring had all been brought to the point of orbiting in the
same time, so that in that state they would be at rest in relation to each
other and by moving away they would have no effect on each other. But
if the motion of the ring were to turn out like this, such a state would
totally destroy the ring, because, if one takes the middle of the plane of
the ring and assumes that the motion of the ring there would remain in
1:299 the state it previously was and must be in order to be able to perform
a free orbit, the lower particles, since they had been held back considerably, would not maintain their height suspended, but would rather
transect each other in oblique and eccentric motions, but the more distant ones, through the impression of a motion larger than it ought to be
for the central force of its distance, would have to turn further away from
e Schwung
254
Saturn than the effect of the Sun determines the outer border of the ring,
would, by the same effect, have to be scattered behind the planet and
carried away.
However, we need not fear all this disorder. The mechanism of the
motion that created the ring leads to a determination which puts the
ring into a secure state by means of precisely the same causes that should
destroy it, because it is divided into numerous concentric circular bands,
which, due to the spaces separating them, have nothing more in common
with each other. For when the particles circling the interior edge of the
ring carry the higher ones along with them somewhat through their
more rapid motion and accelerate their orbits, the increased degrees of
velocity bring about in these an excess of centrifugal forcef and a motion
away from the position in which they were suspended. If, however, one
presupposes that, when these endeavoured to separate themselves from
the lower ones, they have a certain connection to overcome that appears
to be not entirely insignificant in them even though they are scattered
vapours, then this increased level of tangential forceg will endeavour to
overcome the connection mentioned above, but will not overcome it as
long as the excess of centrifugal forceh that it uses in the same orbiting
time as the lowest ones does not exceed this cohesion beyond the central
forcei of its place.j And for this reason, the connection must remain in a
certain breadth of a band of this ring, even though the upper ones must
apply an endeavour to tear themselves away from the lower ones, since
its parts complete their rotation in the same time; but not in a greater
breadth, because while the velocity of these particles that are moved
in equal times increases with the distance, hence more than it ought
to according to the central laws, when it has exceeded the degree that
the connection of the vapour particles can manage, they tear themselves
away from these and must adopt a distance which is appropriate to the
excess of the rotational forcek over the central force of the place. In 1:300
this way the distance that separates the first band of the ring from the
others is established; and in the same way, the accelerated motion of
the upper particles resulting from the rapid revolution of the lower ones
and their connection that strives to prevent the separation, creates the
second concentric ring, from which the third stands apart by a moderate
interval. We could calculate the number of these circular bands and the
width of the intervals between them if we knew the degree of attraction
that connects the particles to each other; however, we can be content
with having surmised with a good degree of probability the composition
f Centrifugalkraft
g des Schwunges
h Centerfliehkraft
i Centralkraft
j Anhangen ¨
k Umwendungskraft
255
of Saturn’s ring, which prevents its destruction and maintains it hovering
by means of free motions.
This conjecture pleases me not a little because of the hope of seeing it confirmed by actual observation one day. A few years ago, news
came from London that, in observing Saturn through a new Newtonian telescope improved by Herr Bradley, it appeared that its ring was
actually a combination of many concentric rings separated by spaces.
1:301 This news has not been continued since then.* The tools of vision have
opened the furthest regions of the universel to our understanding. Now
if it depends primarily on them to take new steps here, then the attentiveness of the century to everything that can extend the insights of
human beings will in all probability give us hope that it will primarily turn to a side that presents it with the greatest hope of important
discoveries.
But if Saturn has been so fortunate as to acquire a ring for itself, why
then has no other planet been able to participate in this advantage? The
cause is clear. Because a ring is supposed to emerge from the evaporation
of a planet given off in its raw state, and the axial rotation must give them
the tangential forcem that they have merely to continue once they have
attained the height at which they can produce an exact balance with this
established motion countering the gravitation towards the planet, we
can easily calculate the height to which these vapours must rise above a
planet for them to maintain free orbital motion by means of the motions
they had at the planet’s equator, if we know the diameter of the planet,
the duration of its revolution, and the gravity on its surface. According
to the law of central motion, the distance of a body that can freely circle
a planet with a velocity equal to that of its axial rotation will be in the
* After I wrote this, I discovered a confirmation of this conjecture, which leaves virtually
no doubt as to its correctness, in the Memoires ´ of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris
for the year 1705 in a treatise by Herr Cassini On the satellites and the ring of Saturn
on page 571 of Part two of the von Steinwehr translation. 64 After Herr Cassini has
advanced an idea that could to some extent have been a small approach to the truth we
have brought out, even though it is improbable in itself, namely that perhaps this ring
could be a swarm of small satellites which, seen from Saturn, would look as the Milky
Way does from the Earth (which thought could be considered if one takes the vapour
particles that circle around it with the same motion to be the small satellites). He then
goes on to say: This thought is confirmed by the observations made in those years
when the ring of Saturn appeared broader and more open. For the breadth of the
ring was seen as being divided into two parts by a dark elliptical line, with the
part nearest to the sphere brighter than the most distant one. This line marked
as it were a small space between the two parts, just as the distance of the sphere
from the rings is indicated by the greatest darkness between them both.
l Weltgebaudes ¨ m Schwung
256
same ratio to half the diameter of the planet as the centrifugal forcen at
its equator is to its gravity. For these reasons, the distance of the inner
edge of Saturn’s ring was as 8, if the half diameter is assumed to be
5, which two numbers are in the same ratio as 32:20 and which, as we
have noted above, express the proportion between the gravity and the
centrifugal forceo at the equator. For the same reasons, if one were to
suppose that Jupiter had a ring produced in the same way, its smallest
semi-diameter would exceed half the width of Jupiter 10 times, which
would place it exactly where its most distant satellite revolves around it 1:302
and hence, for these reasons as well as because the evaporation of a planet
cannot extend so far from it, it is impossible. If one wished to know why
the Earth has not acquired a ring, one would find the answer in the size
of the semi-diameter its inner edge would have to have, which would
have to be 289 semi-diameters of the Earth in size. In the case of the
slower moving planets, the production of a ring is even further removed
from possibility; therefore, no case remains where a planet could have
acquired a ring in the manner we have explained, other than that of
the planet that really does have one, which is no small increase in the
credibility of our mode of explanation.
However, what makes me almost sure that the ring around Saturn
did not come about in the usual manner and was not produced by the
universal laws of formationp that applied throughout the whole planetary
system and provided Saturn with its satellites as well, that, I say this
external matter did not supply its materials for this purpose but is rather
a creature of the planet itself, which has raised its most volatile parts
by means of heat and given them the tangential forceq for orbitingr
through its own axial rotation, is this: that the ring, unlike the planet’s
other satellites and all rotating bodies located in the company of the
main planets in general is not directed in the general plane of reference
of planetary motions, but deviates from it very much, which is a sure
proof that it is not formed out of the universal basic material and did
not receive its motion from its sinking, but rather rose from the planet
long after its formation was complete and received motion and direction
as a separate part of it based on the planet’s axial rotation through its
established rotational force.s
The pleasure at having understood one of the rarest peculiarities of
the heavens in the entirety of its being and generation has involved us
in so extensive a discussion. Let us, with the approval of our obliging
readers, carry it further to the point of excess as much as we like so that,
after we have abandoned ourselves in a pleasant way to arbitrary opinions
n fliehende Kraft
o Centerfliehkraft
p Bildungsgesetze
q Schwung
r Umwendung
s Umschwungskrafte ¨
257
1:303 with a kind of lack of restraint, we can return again to the truth with all
the greater care and caution.
Could we not imagine that the Earth once had a ring like Saturn? It
could have risen from its surface just as Saturn’s did and have remained
for a long time while the Earth was slowed down by who knows what
cause from a much faster rotation to its present rate, or that we can
consider that universal basic material falling sideways was capable of
having formed it in accordance with the rules explained above, which
we do not have to take completely seriously if we want to indulge our
penchant for oddities. But what a stock of lovely explanations and consequences such an idea presents us with! A ring around the Earth! What
a beautiful sight for those created to inhabit the Earth as a paradise;
what comfort for those on which nature smiles from all sides! But this is
nothing compared with the confirmation such a hypothesis can borrow
from the chronicle of the story of creation and which is no small recommendation for applause for those who believe they are not desecrating
but rather confirming the honour of revealed religion when they make
use of it to give the excesses of their wits some prestige. The water of
the firmament mentioned in Moses’ description has already caused the
interpreters some effort. Could one not use this ring to help to get oneself out of this difficulty? Without a doubt this ring consisted of watery
vapours, and in addition to the advantage it was able to provide the first
inhabitants of the Earth, there is the additional one of having it break
when required so that floods could punish the world which had made
itself unworthy of such beauty. Either a comet, whose attraction brought
confusion into the regular motions of its parts, or the cooling of the area
of its location unified its dispersed vaporous particles and hurled it down
onto the earth in one of the most gruesome cloudbursts. It is easy to
know what the consequences of this were. The whole world disappeared
under the water and in the strange and volatile vapours of this unnatural
1:304 rain also absorbed that slow poison which brought all creatures closer
to death and destruction. Now the figure of a pale and light arc had
disappeared from the horizon and the new world, which could never
remember this sight without feeling terror in the face of this terrible
tool of divine revenge, perhaps saw, with not a little consternation, in
the first rain that coloured arc that appeared to copy the first in shape but,
through the assurance of the reconciled heavens, was to be a sign of grace
and a memorial of a continuing preservation of the Earth, changed as it
now was. The similarity of the shape of this memorial sign with the event
it signified could commend such a hypothesis to those who are devoted
to the dominant tendency of bringing the miracles of revelation into the
same system as the ordinary laws of nature. I consider it more advisable
completely to forgo the fleeting applause such correspondences might
arouse for the true pleasure that arises from the perception of regular
258
connections when physical analogies support each other to designate
physical truths.
chapter six.
On the light of the Zodiac.
The Sun is surrounded by a subtle and vaporous essencet which surrounds it in the plane of its equator with a very small width on both sides
up to a great height and where we cannot be certain whether it abuts
the surface of the Sun in the shape of an elevated polished glass (figura
lenticulari) as Herr von Mairan65 depicts it, or whether, like the ring of
Saturn, it is separated from it all around. Regardless of whether it is the
one or the other, there is sufficient similarity to permit a comparison of
this phenomenon with the rings of Saturn and to derive it from a common origin. If this dispersed matter is an outflow from the Sun, as is the
most probable way of viewing it, then we cannot fail to see the cause that
has brought it into a common plane with the Sun’s equator. The lightest 1:305
and most volatile material that the Sun’s fire lifts from its surface and
has done for a long time, is driven away far above it through its activityu
and, in accordance with its lightness, remains hovering at a distance at
which the repelling activityv of the rays achieves a balance with the gravity of these vaporous particles, or they are supported by the influx of
new particles which are added to them continuously. Now, because the
Sun, in turning on its axis, imparts its motion evenly to these vapours
torn from its surface, they retain a certain tangential forcew for rotation,
such that, in accordance with the laws of central forces, they endeavour
from both sides to transect the extended equatorial plane of the Sun in
the circle of their motion; and therefore, since they push towards it from
both hemispheres with the same quantity, they accumulate there with
equal forces and form an extended level in the plane of reference of the
Sun’s equator.
Regardless of this similarity with the ring of Saturn, however, there
remains an essential difference that makes the phenomenon of the zodiacal light very different from the former. The particles of the former
maintain their free floating orbits by means of the rotational motion
impressed on them, but the particles of the latter are maintained at their
height by the force of the Sun’s rays, without which the motion imparted
to them by solar rotation would be insufficient by far to prevent them,
in their free rotation, from falling. Because, as the centrifugal forcex of
t Wesen
u Wirkung
v forttreibende Wirkung
w Schwung
x fliehende Kraft
259
the axial rotation on the surface of the Sun is not even 1/40,000 of the
attraction, these risen vapours would have to be at a distance of 40,000
solar semi-diameters from it before it encountered a gravitation that
could achieve a balance with that of the motion imparted to it. We are
therefore sure that we cannot attribute this phenomenon to the Sun in
the same way as was the case with the ring of Saturn.
Nonetheless, there remains a not inconsiderable probability that this
necklace of the Sun perhaps has the same origin that all of nature has,
namely its formation from the universal basic material, whose parts, since
they had hovered around in the highest regions of the solar system, sank
down to the Sun in a late fall only after the formation of the whole
1:306 system had been completely finished, in a weakened motion that still,
however, curved from west to east, and, by means of this type of circular
motion, transected the extended solar equatorial plane and, by staying
there through their accumulation from both sides, adopted an extended
plane in that position, in which they now maintain themselves continually, by being driven back partly by the Sun’s rays, partly by the circular
motion they have actually attained. The present explanation has no merit
other than that which is due to conjectures and no claim other than for
arbitrary approval; the judgement of the reader may turn to whichever
side seems the most acceptable.
chapter seven.
On Creation in the entire extent of its infinity both
in space and in time.
By its immeasurable magnitude and by the infinite diversity and beauty
that shines forth from it on all sides, the universey puts us into silent
astonishment. While the representation of all this perfection moves the
imagination, another sort of delight captures our understanding when
it contemplates how so much splendour, so much grandeur flows from
a single universal rule with an eternal and rightz order. The planetary
system,a in which the Sun, from the centre point of all orbits, makes the
inhabited spheres of its system circle around in eternal orbits by means
of its mighty attraction, is, as we have seen, entirely formed from the
originally dispersed basic material of all worldly matter.b All the fixed
stars that the eye discovers in the hollow depth of the heavens and that
appear to demonstrate a kind of extravagance, are suns and centre points
of similar systems. The analogy thus does not permit any doubt here
that these were formed and generated in the same manner as the one in
y Weltgebaude ¨
z richtigen
a planetische Weltbau
b aller Weltmaterie
260
which we find ourselves, out of the smallest parts of elementary matter
that filled empty space, that infinite extentc of divine presence.
Now if all the worlds and world-orders recognized the same type of 1:307
origin, if the attraction is unlimited and universal, while the repulsion of
the elements is similarly constantly active, if the large and the small are
both small for the infinite being: Should not all the planetary systemse
have adopted an interrelated constitution and a systematic relation to one
another, in the same way as the heavenly bodies of our solar system have
on a small scale, like Saturn, Jupiter, and the Earth, which are separate
systems by themselves and yet are related to each other as parts in a yet
much greater system? If one were to assume a point in the immeasurable
space in which all the suns of the Milky Way have formed, around which
for I know not what cause the first formation of nature began out of chaos,
then the greatest mass and a body of the most uncommon attraction will
have arisen there, which in this way became capable of forcing all the
systems that were in the process of formation within a vast sphere to
descend towards it as their centre point and to establish around itself a
system that is identical on the scale of the whole as the same elementary
basic matter that formed the planets has made around the Sun on a small
scale. Observation makes this conjecture almost indubitable. Through
its position relative to a common plane, the army of stars constitutes a
system just as much as the planets of our solar system do around the Sun.
The Milky Way is the zodiac of these higher world-orders, which deviate
as little as possible from its zone, and whose band is always illuminated
by its light, just as the zodiac of the planets shimmers from the light of
these spheres now and then, albeit only at very few points. Each one of
these suns with its circulating planets constitutes a separate system for
itself; but this does not prevent them from being parts of a still greater
system, just as Jupiter or Saturn, their own satellites notwithstanding, is
contained within the systematic constitution of an even larger system.f
Can we not recognize the same cause and manner of generation in so
precise an agreement in their constitution?
Now if the fixed stars constitute a system the extent of which is determined by the attractive sphere of the body in the centre, will not more
solar systems and, so to speak, more milky ways have arisen in the lim- 1:308
itless field of space?g We have seen with astonishment shapes in the
heavens that are nothing other than systems of such fixed stars limited to
a common plane, such milky ways, if I may express myself in this way, that
exhibit elliptical shapes in different positions in relation to the eye with
a weakened shimmering as is appropriate to their infinite distance; they
c Umfang
d erkennen
e Weltgebaude ¨
f Weltbaues
g Weltraumes
261
are systems of, so to speak, infinity times infinity greater diameter than
that of our solar system,h but that, without doubt, are generated in the
same way, ordered and arranged by the same causes, and that maintain
themselves by the same mechanismi as this one in its constitution.
If we consider these star systems in turn as links in the great chain of
all nature, then we have just as much cause as before to think of them as
being in a reciprocal relationship and in connections which, by the power
of the law of first formation that governs all nature, constitutes a new,
even larger system that is ruled by the attraction of a body of incomparably more powerful attraction than the ones mentioned previously from
the centre point of their regular positions. The attraction that is the
cause of the systematic constitution among the fixed stars of the Milky
Way is effective even at the distance of precisely these world-orders to
bring them out of their positions and to bury the world in an inevitably
imminent chaos if there were not regularly distributed tangential forcesj
providing a counterbalance to the attraction and both together produce
that relationship that is the basis for the systematic constitution. Attraction is without doubt a quality of matter that is just as pervasive as the
coexistence that makes space in that it combines substances by reciprocal dependences, or, to put it more accurately, attraction is precisely
that universal relationship that unites the parts of nature in one space:
it therefore extends to the entire expanse of space into all the reaches
of its infinity. If the light from these distant systems reaches us, light,
which is merely an impressed motion, then must not rather attraction,
this original source of motion, which is earlier than all motion and which
1:309 requires no external causes and cannot be held up by any impediment,
because it acts on what is innermost in matter without any impact even
in a universal stasis of nature, must not, I say, attraction have set these
systems of fixed stars in motion, despite their immeasurable distances,
at the formless dispersion of its material at the beginning movementk
of nature, which, just as we have seen on a small scale, is the source of
the systematic connection and of the lasting constancy of its parts that
secures them from destruction?
But what then will ultimately be the endl of the systematic arrangements? Where will creation itself stop? It is easy to see that, in order
to think of it in relationship to the might of the infinite being, it must
have no limits at all. We do not come any closer to the infinitude of
God’s creative power if we enclose the space of its revelation within a
sphere described by the radius of the Milky Way than if we were to limit
it to a ball of one inch diameter. Everything that is finite, that has its
h Sonnenbaues
i Triebwerk
j Schwungskrafte ¨
k Regung
l das Ende
262
limits and a determinate relationship to a unit, is equally distant from
the infinite. Now it would be nonsense to posit the deity as activem in
an infinitely small part of its creative capacity and to consider its infinite
force, the store of a true immeasurability of natures and worlds, as being
idle and locked in an eternal state of not being exercised.n Is it not instead
more appropriateo or, expressed better, is it not necessary to describe the
sump of creation as it must be, in order to be a testimonial of that power
that cannot be measured by any measuring stick? For this reason the
field of the revelation of divine qualities is just as infinite as these are
themselves.* Eternity is insufficient to grasp the manifestations of the 1:310
highest being unless it is related to the infinity of space. It is true that
the formation, the shape, the beauty and perfection are relationships of
the building blocksq and of the substances that constitute the material
of the universe;r and we observe it in the measures that the wisdom of
God is still taking all the time; and it is most appropriate to it that they
evolves by an unforced succession from these universal laws implanted
in them. Therefore we can posit with good reason that the ordering and
arrangement of the universest occurs from the store of the created material of nature gradually in a temporal sequence; only the basic matter
itself, the properties and forces of which underlie all changes, is a direct
consequence of the divine existence: this must therefore be at once so
rich, so perfect that the development of its compositions could, in the
passage of eternity, spread over a plane that contains in itself everything
that can exist, that adopts no measure,u in short, that is infinite.
* The concept of an infinite extension of the world has enemies among the advocates
of metaphysics and has found one in Herr M. Weitenkampf 66only recently. If these
gentlemen cannot bring themselves to accept this idea because of the alleged impossibility of a quantity without number or limits, then for the time being I would just ask
whether the future succession of eternity will not encompass in itself a true infinity of
manifolds and changes, and whether this infinite order is not already fully present all
at once in the divine understanding. Now, if it were possible that God can make actual
the concept of infinity that is in his mind all at once, in a sequence in which one follows 1:310
upon the other, why should God not be able to exhibit the concept of another infinity in
a spatially combined connection and in this way make the extent of the world without
limits? While people will try to answer this question, I will take the opportunity that
presents itself to eliminate the supposed difficulty by means of an explanation from the
nature of numbers, insofar as one can, with due consideration, still view it as a question
requiring discussion: whether the relation between what a force accompanied by the
highest wisdom has brought about in order to reveal itself and what it could have
brought about is that of a differential coefficient.
m in Wirksamkeit zu setzen
n Ausubung ¨
o Anstandig ¨
p Inbegriff
q Grundstucke ¨
r Weltbau
s herauswickeln
t der Weltgebaude ¨
u Maß [e.g., no unit of measurement]
263
Now, if creation is therefore infinite as regards spaces, or really has
been since the beginning at least with respect to matter, but is prepared
to become so according to the form or development,v the space of the
universew will be enlivened with worlds without number and without
end. Will then that systematic relationship that we considered earlier in
all parts separately now extend to the whole and encompass the entire
universe,x everything in nature, in a single system through the combination of attraction and centrifugal forcey? I say yes; if there were only
1:311 separate galaxiesz that, between them, have no unified connection to
a whole, then, if one were to assume this chain of links to be actually
infinite, one could well think that an exactly equal attraction of its parts
from all sides could keep these systems safe from the destruction with
which the inner reciprocal attraction threatens them. This, however,
would require such a precisely measured determination in the distances
balanced according to the attraction, that even the slightest disarrangement would bring about the destruction of the universea and deliver it
unto collapse in long periods that would ultimately still have to come to
an end. A world constitutionb that could not sustain itself without a miracle does not have the character of permanence that is a feature of God’s
choice; thus it is far more appropriate if we were to make one system
out of the whole of creation, one that relates all worlds and world-orders
that fill the entirety of infinite space to a single centre point. A dispersed
plethorac of galaxies,d even though they may be separated by ever such
great distances from one another, would rush with an unimpeded tendency to ruin and destruction if a certain arrangement relating towards
a universal centre point, the centre of attraction of the universee and the
supporting point of all nature, had not been made through systematic
motions.
We can assume as probable that it was around this universal centre
point of the sinking of all nature, both formed and raw, at which the
lump with the most exceptional attraction is doubtless to be found, which
embraces in its sphere of attraction all the worlds and orders that time has
produced and that eternity will produce, that nature made the beginning
of its formation, and that the systems will be most densely concentrated
there but that further away in the infinitude of space, they will become
lost with ever greater degrees of dispersion. We could deduce this rule
from the analogy with our solar system,f and this constitution can in any
v Ausbildung
w Weltraum
x Universum
y fliehende Kraft
z Weltgebaude ¨
a Universo
b Weltverfassung
c Gewimmel
d Weltgebauden ¨
e Universi
f Sonnenbaues
264
case serve to show that at great distances, not only the universal central
body but also all the systems orbiting next to it unite their attraction
together and exert it from one lump, as it were, towards the systems at
an even greater distance. This will then be one of the things that will be 1:312
helpful in understanding the whole of nature in the whole infinitude of
its extent within a single system.
Now, in order to trace the establishment of this universal system of
nature from the mechanical laws of matter endeavouring towards formation, at some place in the infinite space of the spread out elementary
basic material, this basic material must have had its densest concentration, in order to have provided, through the initial formation occurring
there, a mass for the entire universeg that would serve it as a supporting
point. It is certainly true that in an infinite space, no point can properly
have the prerogative of being called the centre point; but by means of
a certain relationship that is based on the essential degrees of the density of the original material, according to which, at its creation, this is
initially more densely concentrated at a particular place and increases in
its dispersion with distance from that place, such a point can have the
prerogative of being called the centre point and it actually does become
such through the formation of the central mass of the strongest attraction therein, to which all the remaining elementary matter that is in the
process of coalescing into particular formations descends and thereby,
however far the evolutionh of nature might extend, makes just a single system out of the whole of the universei in the infinite sphere of
creation.
But this is something important, which, insofar as it gains approval, is
worthy of the greatest attention, that according to the order of nature
in our system, creation, or rather the formation of nature, first begins
at this centre point and in a constant advance is gradually dispersed
into all distant expanses to fill infinite space with worlds and orders
in the progress of eternity. Let us pursue this concept for a moment
with quiet pleasure. I find nothing that can raise the human spirit to
nobler astonishment, by giving us a perspectivej on the unending field
of the almighty, than this part of the theory that concerns the successive
completion of creation. If people concede to me that matter, which is the
material for the formation of all worlds, was not uniformly spread out in
the whole infinite space of the divine presence, but according to a certain
law that perhaps related to the density of the particles and according to 1:313
which the dispersion of the original material increased with the distance
from a certain point that was the place of the densest concentration: then,
g Universo
h Auswickelung
i aus dem ganzen All
j Aussicht
265
in the original movementk of nature, the formation will have begun
nearest this centre and then in a progressive time sequence the more
distant space will gradually have formed worlds and world-orders with
a systematic constitution related to that centre. Every finite period, the
length of which stands in a relationship to the size of the work to be
fulfilled, will only ever bring one finite sphere of this centre point to
formation; the remaining infinite part meanwhile will still be in conflict
with confusion and chaos and will be as much further from the state of
perfected formation the greater its distance from the sphere of already
formed nature. As a consequence of this, even though from the place
of our abode in the universel we have a perspectivem on an apparently
completely perfected world and, so to speak, into an infinite host of world
orders that are systematically connected, we actually find ourselves only
in a proximity to the centre point of all nature, where it has already
evolved from chaos and attained the perfection appropriate to it. If we
were able to transcend a certain sphere, we would see there the chaos and
dispersion of the elements, that in proportion to how close they are to this
centre point have partly left the raw state and are nearer to completing
their formation but are gradually lost in complete dispersal with the
degrees of distance. We would see how the infinite space of the divine
presence, where the storen of all possible formations of nature can be
found, lies buried in a silent night full of matter to serve as the material for
worlds to be generated in the future, and of the driving forceo to set them
in motion, that, with a slight movement,p will begin those motions with
which the infinitude of those empty spaces is to be brought to life in the
future. Perhaps a number of millions of years has passed before the sphere
of formed nature in which we find ourselves has grown to the perfection
that now attends it; and perhaps an equally long period will elapse before
1:314 nature takes an equally large step in the chaos: but the sphere of formed
nature is incessantly occupied in spreading itself. Creation is not the work
of one moment. After it has made a beginning with the production of
an infinity of substances and matter, it is effective throughout the entire
sequence of eternity with ever increasing degrees of fruitfulness. Millions
and whole mountain ranges of millions of centuries will pass within which
ever new worlds and world-orders will form and attain completion one
after another in the remote distances from the centre point of nature;
regardless of the systematic constitution among its parts, they will attain
a universal relationship to the centre point that has become the first
point of formation and the centre of creation by the attractive capacity
k Regung
l Universo
m Aussicht
n Vorrath
o Triebfeder
p Regung
266
of its pre-eminentq mass. The infinity of future temporal succession with
respect to which eternity is inexhaustible, will fill all the spaces of the
presence of God completely and gradually put them into the regularity
that is appropriate to the excellence of his design; and if, with a bold
idea, one were able to summarize all eternity, so to speak, into one
concept, then one would also be able to see the whole of infinite space
filled with world-orders and creation completed. But because in fact
the part of the time of eternity that still remains is always infinite and
the elapsed part is finite, the sphere of formed nature is always only an
infinitely small part of that essence which has within it the seed of future
worlds and strives to evolver out of the raw state of chaos over longer or
shorter periods. Creation is never complete. It is true that it began once,
but it will never stop. It is always occupied with bringing forth more
phenomenas of nature, new things and new worlds. The work it brings
about is proportionate to the time it spends on it. It requires nothing
less than eternity to fill the whole limitless expanse of the infinite spaces
with worlds without number and without end. We can say of it what the
most sublime among the German poets writes of eternity:
Infinity! Who misses you? 1:315
Before you, worlds are days and people moments;
Perhaps the thousandth sun is turning now,
And a thousand are behind it still.
Like a clock, enlivened by a weight,
A sun hurries, moved by God’s power:
Its force expires, and another sounds,
But you remain and count them not.
v. Haller.67
It is a not inconsiderable pleasure to allow one’s imagination to roam
freely beyond the limits of perfected creation into the realm of chaos
and to see half raw nature in the proximity of the sphere of the formed
world lose itself bit by bit through all stages and shadings of incompletion in the whole of unformed space. But is it not reprehensible boldness,
people will say, to set up a hypothesis and to praise it as an objectt of
delight for our understanding when it is perhaps only much too arbitrary
if it is maintained that nature is formed only in an infinitely small part
and infinite spaces are still in conflict with chaos so as to present whole
hosts of worlds and world-orders in all proper order and beauty in the
sequence of future times? I am not so devoted to the consequences my
theory offers that I would not recognize how the conjecture about the
q vorzuglich ¨
r auszuwickeln
s Auftritte
t Vorwurf
267
successive expansion of creation through the infinite spaces that contain the material for this in themselves could not completely reject the
objection of unprovability. I do, however, expect from those who are in a
position to appreciate degrees of probability that such a map of infinity,
even though it encompasses a proposal that appears to be determined
to remain forever obscured from human understanding, will not
immediately be regarded as a fantasy for this reason, especially if one
appeals to analogy, which must always guide us in such cases where
understanding lacks the thread of infallible proofs.
But analogy can also be supported by acceptable reasons and the
insight of the reader, in so far as I can flatter myself with such approval,
will perhaps be able to add to them with even more important ones.
1:316 For if one considers that constancy is not a characteristic of creation
if it does not oppose the universal endeavour of the attraction that is
effective throughout all its parts, to an equally pervasive determination
that can sufficiently resist the tendency of the former towards destruction and lack of order, if it did not distribute tangential forcesu which, in
combination with the central inclination, establish a universal systematic constitution; then one is obliged to assume a universal central point
of the whole universe that holds all of its parts together in a connected
relationship and makes just one system out of the sum totalv of nature. If
one adds to this the concept of the formation of the celestial bodies out
of the dispersed elementary matter, as we have outlined above, but does
not restrict it here to a particular system, but rather extends it over the
whole of nature, then one is obliged to consider a dispersion of the basic
material in the space of original chaos such that it naturally includes
one centre point of the whole of creation so that the active mass that
encompasses the whole of nature in its sphere can be brought together
in it and a thoroughgoing relation can be produced, whereby all worlds
constitute only a single structure.w But, in infinite space, it is hardly possible to think of any kind of dispersion of the original basic material that
could posit a true centre and sinking point of all nature other than that
it is arranged in accordance with a law of increasing dispersion from this
point onwards into all the furthest distances. This law, however, also
posits a difference in the time that a system requires in the various areas
of infinite space to attain the maturity of its formation, so that this period
is shorter the closer the formation place of a world structurex is situated
to the centre of creation, because there, the elements of the material are
more densely concentrated, and it requires a longer time, by contrast,
the greater the distance is, because the particles there are more widely
dispersed and come to formation later.
u Schwungskrafte ¨
v aus dem ganzen Inbegriff
w Gebaude ¨
x Weltgebade ¨
268
If one considers the entire hypothesis I am outlining in the whole
extent of both what I have said and what I will still actually present, then
one will at least not regard the boldness of its demands as incapable of
accepting an apology. The inevitable tendency of every perfected world 1:317
structurey gradually towards its destruction can be reckoned among the
grounds that can establish that the universez will, by contrast, be productive of worlds in other regions in order to replace the deficiency it
has suffered in one place. The whole piece of nature that we know, even
if it be merely an atom in view of what remains concealed above or below
our field of vision, still confirms this fruitfulness of nature that is without
limits because it is nothing other than the exercise of divine omnipotence
itself. Countless animals and plants are destroyed daily and are victims
of transience, but through an unexhausted generative capacity nature
brings forth no less again in other places and fills the void. Considerable
areas of the earth that we inhabit are buried again in the sea from which a
favourable period had dragged them; but in other places, nature replaces
the deficiency and brings forth other regions that had been concealed in
the depths of the water to spread new riches of its fruitfulness over them.
In the same way, worlds and world-orders pass away and are swallowed
by the abyss of eternities; by contrast, creation is ever busy carrying out
new formations in other regions of the heavens and replacing what has
gone with advantage.
We should not be astonished at allowing transience even in the greatness of God’s works. Everything that is finite, that has a beginning and an
origin, has in itself the quality of its limited nature; it must pass and have
an end. The duration of a world structurea has, thanks to the excellence
of its arrangement, a constancy that approaches an infinite duration in
terms of our concepts. Perhaps a thousand, perhaps a million centuries
will not destroy it, but because the vanity that attaches to finite natures
is constantly working at its destruction, eternity will contain all possible
periods and, by a gradual decay, bring about the time of its destruction. Newton, that great admirer of God’s qualities from the perfection
of his works, who combined the most profound insight into the excellence of nature with the greatest reverence towards the revelation of
divine omnipotence, saw himself obliged to proclaim to nature its decay 1:318
through the natural tendency that the mechanics of motion has. If a
systematic constitution, through the essentialb consequence of its frailty
over great periods of time, brings even the tiniest part one can imagine
closer to the state of its confusion, then in the infinite passage of eternity
there must surely be a point in time when the gradual diminution has
exhausted all motion.
y Weltgebaude ¨
z das Universum
a Weltgebaude ¨
b wesentliche
269
However, we must not lament the end of a world structurec as a true
loss of nature. Nature shows its bounty in a kind of extravagance, which,
while some parts pay their tribute to transience, maintains itself regardless through countless new creations in the whole extent of its perfection.
What a countless mass of flowers and insects does not a single cold day
destroy; but how little do we miss them even though they are splendid
artworks of nature and proofs of divine omnipotence! In another place,
this loss is replaced again with abundance. Human beings, who appear
to be the masterpiece of creation, are themselves not excluded from this
law. Nature shows that it is just as bountiful, just as inexhaustible in the
production of the most excellent of creatures as it is in that of those of
low regard, and that even their end is a necessary gradation in the diversity of its suns, because their creation costs it nothing. The deleterious
effects of infected air, earthquakes, floods eradicate whole peoples from
the face of the earth, but it does not appear that nature has suffered any
disadvantage through this. In a similar way, whole worlds and systems
leave the scene after they have finished playing their roles. The infinity
of creation is great enough for us to view a world or a Milky Way of
worlds in comparison to it, just as we view a flower or an insect in comparison to the Earth. Meanwhile, so that nature will beautify eternity
with changeable scenes, God remains busy in ceaseless creation to make
the materiald for the formation of even greater worlds.
He who, being the creator of everything, with the same eye
Sees a hero perish and a little sparrow fall,
Sees a water bubble burst and a whole world end.
Pope in Brocke’s translation.68
1:319 Let us therefore accustom our eye to these frightening upheavals as
being the ordinary ways of providence and even regard them with a kind
of appreciation. And indeed nothing is more appropriate to the bounty of
nature than this. For when, in the long sequence of its duration, a world
systeme exhausts all the diversity that its arrangement can encompass,
when it has now become a superfluous link in the chain of beings, then
nothing is more proper than that it should play the final role in the play
of changes unfolding in the universef that is given to every finite thing,
namely to pay its dues to transience. Nature shows, as mentioned above,
even in the small part of its essenceg this rule of its method that eternal
destiny has prescribed for it in the whole, and I say it again, the greatness
of what is to come to an end is not in the least a hindrance in this, for
all that is great will become small, indeed it will become, as it were, only
c Weltgebaude ¨
d Zeug
e Weltsystem
f Universi
g Inbegriff
270
a point when compared to the infinitude that creation will represent in
unlimited space throughout the sequence of eternity.
It appears that this endh that has been imposed on the worlds as well
as on all things in nature is subject to a certain law, the consideration
of which gives the theory a new touch of propriety. According to this,
it begins with those celestial bodies that are nearest the centre point of
the universe, just as the generation and formation initially began next
to this centre; from there decay and destruction spread bit by bit into
the more remote distances in order finally to bury all the worlds that
have completed their term through a gradual decline of motions in one
total chaos. On the other hand, on the opposite border of the formed
universe,i nature is constantly occupied in forming new worlds out of
the raw material of the dispersed elements, and while it is ageing on
the side near the centre, it is young and fruitful with new creations
on the other. According to this, the formed world is restricted in the
middle between the ruins of destroyed nature and between the chaos of
unformed nature and if, as is probable, one imagines that a world already
grown to perfection could last for a longer time than it required to be
formed, then, in spite of all the devastation that transience unceasingly 1:320
causes, the extent of the universej in general will still increase.
However, if finally people are prepared to leave space for an idea that
is just as probable as it is proper to the constitution of divine works, then
the satisfaction stimulated by such a description of changes in nature
will be raised to the highest degree of pleasure. Can one not believe that
nature, which was capable of placing itself out of chaos into a regular
order and into a clever system, is equally in a position to produce itself
again just as easily out of the chaos in which the diminution of its motions
had sunk it, and to renew the original combination? Can the springs that
brought the material of dispersed matter into motion and order, after the
standstill of the machine has brought them to a stop, not become effective
again through extended forces and restrict themselves to a harmony in
accordance with just the same universal laws through which the original
formation was brought into being? People will not have reservations
about admitting this for long when they consider that, after the final
exhaustionk of the orbital motions in the solar systeml has hurled the
planets and comets all together down onto the Sun, the heat of which
must increase immeasurably as a result of the mixing of so many and
such large lumps, principally because, according to our theory proven
above, the distant spheres of the solar system contain the material that
is lightest in all nature and most effective in a fire. This fire, changed
h Ende
i Welt
j Universi
k endliche Mattigkeit
l Weltgebaude ¨
271
into the greatest intensity by new fuel and the most volatile matter,
will, without a doubt, not only dissolve everything into the smallest
elements again, but will also disperse and distribute them in this way
with an expansive force appropriate to the heat and with a velocity that
is not weakened by any resistance of the surrounding space into the same
huge spaces again that they have occupied before the first formation of
nature, and, after the intensity of the central fire has been reduced by
the almost total dispersion of its mass, by a combination of the attractive
and repelling forces, repeat the old creationsm and systematically related
motions with no less regularity and represent a new world structure.n If
1:321 then a particular planetary system has fallen into decay in this manner
and has generated itself again by means of essential forces, if indeed it
repeats this game more than once: then finally that period will approach
which will in the same way gather the great system of which the fixed
stars are members into one chaos through the decay of its motions. One
will have even fewer doubts here that the unification of so infinite a
quantity of flammable matter as these burning suns represent, together
with the retinue of their planets dissolved by the ineffable heat, will
disperse the material of their masses in the old space of their sphere
of formation and there the materials for new formations are provided
through the same mechanical laws, through which again the empty space
can be populated with worlds and systems. If we follow this phoenix of
nature, which burns itself only to rise rejuvenated from its ashes to new
life through all infinity of time and space; when one sees how, even in
the region where it decays and ages, it continues unexhausted with new
appearances and on the other border of creation it proceeds in the space
of unformed raw matter with constant steps for the expansion of the
plan of divine revelation to fill eternity as well as all the spaces with its
wonders: then the mind that contemplates all this sinks into a profound
astonishment; and yet still unsatisfied with this so great object, whose
transience cannot satisfy the soul sufficiently, he wishes to get to know
at close quarters that being whose understanding, whose greatness is
the source of that light which spreads over all of nature as though from
one centre point. With what kind of reverence does not the soul have
to regard even its own being, when it considers that it is to survive all
these changes, it can then say to itself what the philosophical poet says of
eternity:
When then a second nothingness will bury this world,
When of every thing itself nothing remains but the place,
When even many a sky, illuminated by other stars
Will have completed its course:
m Zeugungen n Weltgebaude ¨
272
You shall be as young as now, just as far from your death,
Just as eternally future as today.
v. Haller.69
O happy if, among the tumult of the elements and the ruins of nature, 1:322
it is always positioned at a height from which it can see the devastations
that frailty causes the things of the world to rush past under its feet,
so to speak! A happiness such as reason may not even have the temerity
to wish for, revelation teaches us to hope for with conviction. When
the shackles that hold us to the vanity of creatures have fallen off at the
moment that has been determined for the transfiguration of our being,
then the immortal spirit, liberated from dependence on finite things,
and in the company of the infinite being, will find the enjoyment of
true happiness. The whole of nature, which has a universal harmonious
relationship with the pleasure of the divinity, cannot fill that reasonable
creature that is at one with this original source of all perfection with anything other than everlasting satisfaction. Nature, seen from this centre
point, will show nothing but certainty, nothing but propriety from all
sides. The changeable scenes of nature are not capable of disturbing the
peace of happiness of a spirit that has been raised to such heights. While
it tastes this state in advance through a sweet hope, it can exercise its
mouth in those paeans of praise with which all eternities will one day
resound.
When one day the structure of the world has hurried back into its
nothingness
And the work of your hands is no longer separated by night and day
Then shall my moved spirit, strengthened by you, attempt
Always to stand before your throne in adoration of your omnipotence
My mouth, filled with thanks, shall through all eternities
Present you and your majesty with unending praise;
Even if I can say no perfect praise: for, O Lord! you are so great
Eternity would not suffice to praise you as you are worthy of it.
Addisson [sic]
In Gottsched’s translation.70
supplement 1:323
to chapter seven.
Universal theory and history of the Sun.
There is one major question the resolution of which is indispensable
in the doctrine of nature of the heavens and in a complete cosmogony.
Why is the centre point of every system occupied by a flaming body?
273
Our planetary systemo has the Sun as its central body and the fixed stars
we see are to all appearances centre points of similar systems.
In order to understand why, in the formation of a planetary structurep
the body that serves as the middle point of the attraction had to be a fiery
body, while the remaining spheres in its range of attraction stayed dark
and cold celestial bodies, one need only recall the manner in which a
systemq is generated that we have outlined in detail above. In the widely
spread space in which the dispersed elementary basic material embarks
on formations and systematic motions, planets and comets form only
out of that part of the elementary basic material sinking towards the
centre point of attraction that has been determined by the fall and the
interaction of all the particles for the precise restriction of direction and
velocity required for rotation. This part is, as shown above, the least
of the whole sumr of the matter sinking downwards, and in fact only
the detritus of denser kinds that have been able to attain this degree
of precision through the resistance of the others. In this mixs there are
upwards floating kinds of outstanding lightness, which, hindered by the
resistance of space, do not reach the appropriate velocityt of periodic
rotation through their fall and which as a result are all thrown down to
the central body in the decrease of their tangential force.u Now because
precisely these lighter and volatile parts are also the most effective in
maintaining fire, we can see that, by adding them, the body and central
point of the system attains the advantage of becoming a flaming sphere,
in a word, a sun. Conversely, the heavier and powerless material and the
1:324 absence of these fire-feeding particles will make of the planets only cold
and dead lumps that are deprived of this quality.
It is also through this addition of such light matters that the Sun has
attained the lesser specific density by which it is four times inferior even
to our Earth, the third planet in distance from it; although it is natural
to believe that the heaviest and densest types of matter should be found
in this centre point of the world structure,v being its lowest point so that
it would surpass the density of all planets without the addition of such a
large quantity of the lightest material.
The blending of denser and heavier types of elements with these
lighter and more volatile ones also serves to prepare the central body
for the fiercest heat that is to burn and be maintained on its surface.
For we know that a fire, in the feeding material of which dense matters are blended with volatile ones, has a great advantage of fierceness
over those flames that are maintained only by light types. However, this
o Weltbau
p Weltgebaude ¨
q Weltbau
r Menge
s Gemenge
t Schnelligkeit
u in der Mattigkeit ihres Schwunges
v Weltbau
274
intermingling of some heavy types among the lighter ones is a necessary
consequence of our doctrine of the formation of the celestial bodies and
additionally has this benefit, that the force of the heat does not suddenly
disperse the combustible matter of the surface and that it is gradually
and constantly fed by the influx of fuel from the interior.
After the question has now been resolved why the central body of a
great stellar system is a flaming sphere, that is, a sun, it does not seem
superfluous to occupy ourselves with this subjectw for a while and to
explore the state of such a heavenly body with a careful examination,
particularly as conjectures here can be derived from more valid reasons
than they generally tend to be with studies of the constitution of distant
heavenly bodies.
First of all, I establish that there can be no doubt that the Sun really
is a flaming body and not merely a mass of molten and glowing matter
heated to an extreme degree as some have tried to conclude from certain
difficulties they thought they had encountered with the first opinion.
For if one considers that a flaming fire has this essential advantage over
every other kind of heat that it, so to speak, is active out of itself instead 1:325
of diminishing or exhausting itself by transference, but rather thereby
acquires more strength and fierceness and thus requires only material
and feeding for its maintenance in order to continue on and on; the
incandescencex of a mass heated to the highest degree, by contrast, is a
merely passive state that incessantly diminishes by community with the
matter it touches and has no powers of its own to spread from a small
beginning or to come back to life again after being diminished, if, I say,
one considers this, one will be able to see clearly from this, and I say
nothing about the other reasons, that the sun, the source of light and
heat in every world structure,y will in all probability have to be accorded
this quality.
Now, if the Sun, or suns altogether, are flaming spheres, then the first
quality of their surface that can be deduced from this is that air must be
there, since no fire will burn without air. This circumstance gives rise
to noteworthy conclusions. For if we first place the atmosphere of the
Sun and its mass in relation to the lump of the Sun, in what state of
pressure will this air not be, and how capable will it not thereby become
of maintaining the most violent degrees of fire through its elastic force?z
In all probability smoke clouds from the matter burnt by the flames
also rise in this atmosphere, and there can be no doubt that this matter
contains a mix of coarse and lighter particles which, after they have risen
to a height that fosters cooler air for them, crash down in heavy rains of
pitch and sulphur and provide new nourishment for the flames. Precisely
w Vorwurfe
x Gluth
y Weltbau
z Federkraft
275
this atmosphere is not free from the motions of the windsa for the same
reasons as on our Earth, but which from all appearances must greatly
exceed in vehemence everything the imagination can picture for itself.
Whenever some region on the surface of the Sun lessens the outbreak
of the flame, either as a result of the asphyxiating force of the vapours
breaking out or by the sparing influx of flammable matter, the air above
1:326 cools somewhat and, as it contracts, it makes room for the air next to
it, with a force appropriate to the excess of its expansion, to reignite the
extinguished flame.
Nonetheless all flames always devour much air and there is no doubt
that the elastic forceb of the liquid element of air that surrounds the Sun
must suffer over time a not inconsiderable disadvantage thereby. If we
were to apply on a large scale what Herr Hales71 has confirmed through
careful experiments about the actionc of flame in our atmosphere, then we
can consider the continuous endeavour of the smoke particles deriving
from the flame to destroy the elasticity of the Sun’s atmosphere as one
principal knot, the solution of which is bound up with difficulties. For
because the flame that burns over the entire surface of the Sun takes
away from itself the air that is necessary for it to burn, the Sun is in
danger of being completely extinguished when the greatest part of its
atmosphere has been consumed. It is true that fire also creates air by
the dissolution of certain matters, but experiments prove that more is
always consumed than is produced. On the one hand, when one part
of the sun’s fire is robbed of the air that serves to maintain it through
suffocating vapours, then, as we have noted above, violent storms will try
to disperse them and conduct them away. On the other hand, in general
we can make the replacement of this required element understandable
in the following way if we take into consideration that, since in a flaming
fire the heat acts almost only above and only very little below it, when
it has been suffocated by the cause mentioned above, it turns its vigour
towards the interior of the Sun’s body and forces the deep chasms there
to let the air locked in its caverns to break out and to stoke the fire anew;
if, by taking a liberty that is not forbidden in the case of so unknown
an object, we primarily posit in its innards matters that, like saltpetre,
are inexhaustibly productive of elastic air, then the Sun’s fire will not
readily suffer the absence of a constantly renewed air supply over very
long periods.
Nonetheless we can see the distinct characteristics of transience even
in this immeasurabled fire that nature has set up as a torch for the world.
There will come a time when it will be extinguished. The removal of
1:327 the most volatile and finest matters, which, dispersed by the violence
a Wege
b Federkraft
c Wirkung
d unschatzbaren ¨
276
of the heat, will never return and increase the material of the zodiacal
light, the accumulation of non-combustible and burnt out matter, e.g.,
the ash on the surface, and finally too the absence of air will set an
ende to the Sun’s days as its flame will go out one day and its place,
now the centre point of light and life for the whole planetary system,f
will be occupied by eternal darkness. The alternating endeavour of its
fire to flare up again by opening up new caverns, by means of which it
perhaps rejuvenates itself repeatedly in the face of its demise, could be an
explanation for the disappearance and reappearance of some fixed stars.
These would be suns that are close to their extinction and that attempt to
revive themselves out of their ashes a number of times. This explanation
may deserve approval or not, but in any case we will certainly have to let
this observation serve to make us realize that, since, one way or another,
the perfection of all world-orders is threatened by inevitable destruction,
we shall find no difficulty in the aforementioned law of their demise by
means of the tendency of the mechanical arrangement, which, however,
becomes acceptable, principally because it bears within itself the seed of
renewal even in being conjoined with chaos.
Finally, let us have our imagination represent a wonderfully strange
object such as a burning sun as it were from close up. In one glance, we
see broad lakes of fire lifting their flames up to the sky, raging storms
whose fury redoubles the violence of the former, which, by making them
swell up over their banks, now cover the raised areas of this celestial body,
now make them sink back to within their borders; burnt-out rocks that
stretch their terrible peaks out of the flaming maws, and whose flooding
or uncovering by the surging fiery element is the cause of the alternating
appearance and disappearance of the sunspots; dense vapours that choke
the fire and, raised by the force of the winds, constitute dark clouds
which in turn crash down in fiery showers of rain and, in the form of
burning rivers, pour into the flaming valleys from the heights of the firm
land of the Sun*, the crashing of the elements, the detritus of burnt-out 1:328
matters, and nature wrestling with destruction, which even in the most
* It is not without cause that I ascribe to the suns all the unevennesses of firm land,
mountains, and valleys that we encounter on our Earth and other celestial bodies.
The formation of a world sphere that is transforming itself from a liquid into a solid state
necessarily brings about such unevennesses on its surface. As the surface hardens, while
in the fluid interior parts of such a mass, the matters are still sinking towards the centre
point in accordance with their weights, the particles of the elastic air or fire element
that is mixed in with these matters are driven out and accumulate under the meanwhile
solidified crust under which they generate large caves immense in proportion to the
lump of the sun, into which the topmost crust mentioned above ultimately sinks with
various folds and in this way prepares raised regions and mountain ranges as well as
valleys and flood plains of broad fire lakes.
e Ziel f Weltgebaude ¨
277
loathsome state of its disorder brings about the beauty of the world and
the benefit of the creatures.
If therefore the centre points of all great world systemsg are flaming
bodies, then this can be assumed to apply most to the central body of that
immeasurable system that the fixed stars constitute. But if it were a selfilluminating body or a sun, would not this body, the mass of which must
stand in a ratio to the magnitude of its system, be obvious through its
pre-eminent brilliance and magnitude? Despite this, we do not see any
such exceptionally distinct fixed star shining forth among the heavenly
hosts. Indeed we should not be surprised if this does not happen. Even
if it exceeded our Sun 10,000 times in size, and we were to assume its
distance to be 100 times greater than that of Sirius, it could not appear
larger and brighter than that star.
Perhaps, however, it is given to future times at least to discover the
1:329 region where the centre point* of the fixed star system to which our
Sun belongs is to be found, or perhaps even to determine where we
must posit the central body of the universeh to which all its parts are
aiming with unanimous descent. As regards the constitution of this fundamental piece of the entirety of creation and what one might find on
it, we shall allow Herr Wright of Durham to determine, who, with a
* I have a conjecture according to which it seems very likely to me that Sirius or the Dog
Star in the system of stars that make up the Milky Way is the central body and occupies
the centre point to which they all refer. If one were to consider this system in terms of
the outline in the first part of this treatise as a milling massi of suns heaped together
into a common plane, which has been strewn in all directions from its central point
and yet constitutes a certain, as it were, circle-shaped space that also extends widthways
from both sides as a result of minor deviations from the plane of reference; then the
1:329 Sun, which is also near this plane, will see the appearance of this circle-shaped, whiteshimmering zone most broadly towards that side to which it is closest to the furthest
limit of the system, for it is easy to suppose that it would hardly be at the centre point.
Now the band of the Milky Way is broadest in the section between the sign of the
Cygnus and that of Sagittarius, therefore this will be the side where the place of our Sun
is closest to the periphery of the circle-shaped system; and it is in this section that we will
consider the place where the constellations of the Aquila and the Vulpecula stand with
the Anser particularly as the very closest, because it is there that the greatest apparent
dispersion of stars shines forth from the space where the Milky Way divides. Therefore,
if one draws a line approximately from a point next to the tail of Aquila through the
middle of the plane of the Milky Way to the opposite point, then it must meet the centre
point of the system and indeed it very precisely meets Sirius, the brightest star in the
whole sky which, because of its fortunate coinciding that harmonizes so well with its
splendid figure, seems to deserve to be regarded as the central body itself. According to
this notion it would be seen precisely in the band of the Milky Way were it not that the
position of our Sun, deviating somewhat from the plane at the tail of Aquila, causes the
optical distance of the centre point towards the other side of that zone.
g Weltsystemen
h Universi
i Gewimmel
278
fanatical enthusiasm, raised, in this fortunate place as it were onto a
throne of all nature, a powerful being of a divine sort with spiritual powers
of attraction and repulsion, which, effectivej in an infinite sphere around
itself, drew all virtue to itself but drove back all vice. We do not wish
to allow free rein to the boldness of our conjectures, which we perhaps
have permitted only too much, to the point of arbitrary inventions. The
deity is equally present in the infinity of the entire universe; wherever
there are beings capable of elevating themselves above the dependence
of creatures to the community of the highest being, it is equally close.
All of creation is permeated by its powers but only someone who is
capable of liberating oneself from being a creature, who is so noble as to 1:330
realize that the highest level of happiness is to be sought solely in partaking of this original source of perfection, that one alone is capable of being
closer to this true reference point of all excellence than anything else in
all of nature. However, if I, without participating in the enthusiastic ideas
of the Englishman, were to make conjectures about the different grades
of the spiritual world on the basis of the physical relations of their domiciles to the centre point of creation, then I would seek the most perfect
classes of rational beings further away from this centre point than closer
to it. The perfection of creatures endowed with reason, insofar as it is
dependent on the constitution of matter, in the connection with which
they are restricted, depends very much on the fineness of the material
whose influence determines them in their imagek of the world and in
their reaction to it. The inertia and the resistance of matter restricts the
freedom of spiritual beings for actionl and the clarity of their sensation
of external things far too much, it makes their capacities blunt in that
they do not obey its motions with appropriate lightness. Therefore, if
we assume, as is likely, the densest and heaviest types of matter to be
near the centre point of nature, while degrees of fineness and lightness
increase at greater distances in accordance with the analogy that rules
our universe,m then the consequence is understandable. Those rational
beings, whose place of origin and residence is closer to the centre point
of creation, are mired in a stiff and immovable matter that contains their
strength locked in an insuperable inertia and is also just as incapable of
transmitting and communicating the impressions of the universen with
the requisite distinctness and ease. We will therefore have to reckon
these thinking beings as being part of the low class; by contrast, this
perfection of the spiritual world, which rests upon a mutual dependence
on matter, will increase with the distances from the universal centre like
a constant ladder. As a result we have to place the worst and least perfect
j wirksam
k Vorstellung
l zum Wirken
m Weltbau
n Universi
279
types of thinking natures in the most profound lowering to this sinking
point, and it is in this direction that this excellence of beings, with all
1:331 shades of diminution, is finally lost in the complete absence of reflection and thinking. Indeed, when one considers that the centre point of
nature constitutes simultaneously the beginning of its formation out of
raw materialo and its border with chaos; if one adds to this that the perfection of spiritual beings, which certainly has an outermost limit of its
beginning, where their capabilities collide with lack of reason,p but no
limits of continuation beyond which they could not be raised, but rather
finds itself confronted on that side with complete infinity; then, if a law
is to be in place according to which the domiciles of intelligent creatures
are distributed in the order of their relation to the common centre point,
we shall have to place the lowest and least complete type that constitutes,
as it were, the beginning of the type of the spiritual world, at that region
that can be called the beginning of the entire universeq in order to fill
simultaneously with this and in equal progression all infinity of time
and spaces with increasing degrees of perfection of the capacity to think
and as it were gradually to approach the goalr of the highest excellence,
namely the divinity without, however, ever being able to attain it.
chapter eight.
General proof of the correctness of a mechanical doctrine of the
arrangement of the universe overall, particularly of the certainty
of the present one.
One cannot look at the universes without recognizing the most excellent
order in its arrangement and the sure characteristics of the hand of God
in the perfection of its relations. Reason, having considered and admired
so much beauty, so much excellence, is rightly incensed at the bold foolishness that has the audacity to attribute all this to coincidence and a
1:332 fortuitous chance. The highest wisdom must have made the design and
an infinite power carried it out, otherwise it would be impossible that so
many intentions that come together for one purpose could be encountered in the constitution of the universe.t It is simply a matter of deciding
whether the design of the arrangement of the universeu had already been
placed in the essential determinations of the eternal natures and planted
into the universal laws of motion by the highest understanding so that
o Zeug
p Unvernunft
q Universi
r Ziel
s Weltgebaude ¨
t Weltgebaudes ¨
u Universi
280
it developed out of them naturally in a manner proper to the most perfect order, or whether the general properties of the constituent parts of
the world have a complete incapacity for harmony and not the slightest
reference to any combination and definitely required an external hand
to acquire that limitation and coordination that shows perfection and
beauty in it. An almost universal prejudice has set most philosophers
against nature’s ability to produce anything orderly through its universal laws just as though it would be disputing God’s governance of the
world if one were to seek original formations in the forces of nature
and as though these were a principle independent of the divinity and an
eternal blind fate.
However, if one considers that nature and the eternal laws that are prescribed to substances for their interaction, are not a principle independent and necessary without God, that precisely because of the fact that
it shows so much correspondence and order in what it produces through
universal laws, we can see that the essences of all things must have their
common origin in a certain primitive beingv and that for this reason they
reveal many reciprocal relationships and much harmony because their
properties have their source in a single highest understanding, whose
sage idea designed them in constant proportions and implanted in them
that ability by which they produce much beauty, much order in the state
of activity if left to themselves, if, I say, one considers this, then nature
will appear to us more dignified than it is commonly regarded and one
will expect from its unfoldingw nothing but correspondence, nothing
but order. If, by contrast, one gives credit to an unfounded prejudice,
that the universal laws of nature in and of themselves create nothing but
disorder and any useful correspondences that shine forth in the consti- 1:333
tution of nature points to the direct hand of God, then one is required
to turn the whole of nature into miracles. One will not derive from the
implanted forces of matter the beautiful colourful arc that appears in
raindrops when they separate the colours of sunlight, due to its beauty,
the rain due to its usefulness, the winds due to the indispensable advantages they provide for human needs in endless ways, in short, all changes
of the world that bring along propriety and order. The endeavours of
natural scientistsx who have involved themselves with such a philosophy will have to make an apology before the judgement seat of religion.
Indeed, there will then no longer be any nature; there will be only a
god in the machine bringing about the changes of the world. However, what will this strange means of proving the certainty of the highest
being on the basis of the essential incapacity of nature do to convert the
Epicurean? If the natures of things bring about nothing but disorder and
v Grundwesen
w Auswickelungen
x Naturforscher
281
nonsense through the eternal laws of their essences, then precisely by
this will they prove the character of their independence from God; and
what sort of a notion of a deity will one be able to make for oneself whom
the universal laws of nature obey only because of a sort of compulsion
and are actually in conflict with its wisest designs? Will not the enemy
of providence win just as many victories over these false principles as
he can demonstrate correspondences that the universal causal laws of
nature bring forth without any special limitations? And could he lack
such examples? On the contrary, let us conclude with greater propriety
and correctness as follows: Nature, left to its own universal properties,
is fertile in many beautiful and perfect fruits which not only show correspondence and excellence in themselves but also harmonize with the
entire realm of their beings, with the usefulness to mankind and the glorification of the divine properties. From this it follows that their essential
properties can have no independent necessity, but rather that they must
have their origin in a single understanding as the ground and source of
1:334 all beings, and in which they have been designed under mutual relations.
All things that relate to one another in a reciprocal harmony must be
combined with each other in a single being on which they all depend.
Therefore there is a being of all beings, an infinite understanding and
self-sufficienty wisdom, out of which nature also draws its origin in the
entire sum total of its determinations, even according to its possibility.
Now we cannot dispute the capacity of nature to be disadvantageous to
the existence of a highest being; the more perfect it is in its developments,
the better its universal laws lead to order and correspondence: the surer
a proof it is of the divinity from which it borrows these relations. Its
productions are no longer the effects of chance and the consequences of
accidents: everything flows from it according to immutable laws, which
must therefore display much skill because they are nothing but aspects
of the wisest design from which all disorder has been banished. It is not
the accidental accumulation of Lucretius’ atoms that formed the world;
implanted forces and laws that have the wisest reason as their source,
have been an immutable origin of that order that had to flow from them,
not by accident, but by necessity.
If therefore we can liberate ourselves from an old and unfounded prejudice and from the lazy philosophy that tries to hide a sluggish lack of
knowledge behind a pious face, then I hope to found a sure conviction
on incontrovertible grounds: that the world recognizes a mechanical development out of the universal laws of nature as the origin
of its constitution; and that secondly the manner of its mechanical
generation we have presented is the true one. If one wants to judge
whether nature has sufficient capacities to bring about the arrangement
y selbstandige ¨
282
of the universez by a mechanical consequence of its laws of motion, then
one must first consider how simple the motions are that the world bodies observe and that they have nothing about them that requires a more
precise determination than the universal rules of natural forces have in
themselves. The orbital motions consist of the relationship between the
sinking force that is a certain result of the properties of matter and of
the shooting motion that can be regarded as the effect of the former, as
a velocity resulting from the sinking, in which only a certain cause was 1:335
needed to bend the vertical fall sidewards. After the determination of
these motions was once attained, nothing further is needed to maintain
them forever. They continue to exist in empty space by the combination
of the once impressed shooting force with the attraction flowing from
the essential forces of nature and suffer no further change. The analogies in the correspondence of these motions alone show the reality of
a mechanical origin so clearly that one can harbour no doubts about it.
For
1. these motions have a corresponding direction throughout, so that of
six main planets and 10 satellites there is not a single one that moves in any
direction other than from west to east, both in their forward motion and
in the rotation around their axis. In addition, these directions correspond
so precisely that they deviate only a little from a common plane, and this
plane to which everything refers, is the equatorial plane of the body
that rotates on its axis in the same direction at the centre point of the
whole system and which, by its very strong attraction, has become the
reference point of all motions and therefore must have participated in
them as precisely as possible. One proof that all the motions arose and
were determined in a mechanical manner according to the universal laws
of nature and that the cause that either impressed the lateral motions or
put them right dominated the entire space of the planetary structurea
and in this obeys the laws that matter observes in a space moved in
common, [is] that all different motions ultimately adopt a single direction
and altogether make themselves refer as precisely as possible to a single
plane.
2. the velocities are constituted in the way they have to be in a space
where the moving force is in the centre point, that is, they decrease in
constant degrees with the distances from it and lose themselves in the
greatest distance in a complete exhaustion of motion which bends the
vertical fall laterally only very little. From Mercury onwards, which has
the greatest tangential force, we can see that it decreases in stages and in
the outermostcomets is as slight as it possibly could be without actually 1:336
falling into the Sun. No one can object that the rules of central motions
z Weltbaues a Planetengebaudes ¨
283
in circular orbits demand that, the closer to the centre point of the universal sinking, the greater must be the rotational velocity; for, why must
just those heavenly bodies close to this centre have circle-shaped orbits?
Why are the closest ones not very eccentric and the more distant ones
orbiting in circles? Or rather since they all deviate from this measured
geometrical precision, why does this deviation increase with the distances? Do not these relationships describe the point towards which all
motion originally thronged and also attained greater degrees according
to the measure of proximity before other determinations altered their
directions into the current ones?
However, if one were to wish to except the constitution of the universeb
and the origin of motions from the universal laws of nature in order to
attribute them to the direct hand of God, then one will rapidly become
aware that the analogies mentioned evidently contradict such an idea.
For, firstly, as concerns the correspondence in direction throughout, it is
obvious that there is no reason here why the bodies in the universe would
have to arrange their orbits in one single direction if the mechanism of
their origin had not determined them to do so. For the space in which
they move offers infinitely little resistance and limits their motions as
little in one direction as it does in the other; thus God’s choice would
not bind itself to a single determination without the slightest motive, but
show itself in all sorts of variations and differences with greater freedom.
Furthermore: why do the orbits of the planets refer so precisely to a
common plane, namely to the equatorial plane of that great body that
rules their orbits from the centre point of all motion? This analogy,
instead of revealing a motive for propriety in itself, is rather the cause
of a certain confusion that would be resolved by a free deviation of
the planetary orbits: for the attractions of the planets now disturb the
uniformity of their motions to some extent and would not hinder each
other at all if they did not refer to a common plane so precisely.
1:337 Even more than all these analogies, the clearest characteristic of the
hand of nature is shown by the absence of the most precise determination
in those relations it endeavoured to attain. If it were best for the planetary orbits to have been placed almost on a common plane, why are they
not exactly so? And why has a part of that deviation remained that ought
to have been avoided? Thus if the planets closer to the orbit of the Sun
have received the magnitude of the tangential force holding the attraction in equilibrium, why is there still something missing in this complete
equality? And why are their orbits not completely circular if merely the
wisest intention supported by the greatest faculty tried to bring forth this
determination? Is it not clearly to be seen that the cause that situated
the orbits of the heavenly bodies by endeavouring to bring them onto
b Weltbaues
284
a common plane was not able to achieve this completely; similarly, that
the force that ruled the space of the heavens when all matter that is now
formed into spheres received its orbital velocities, certainly attempted
to bring them into an equilibrium with the sinking force near the centre
point but was not able to attain complete exactness? Cannot the usual
procedure of nature be recognized in this, which is made to deviate from
the completely precise determinations in each case by the interference
of various concurrent actionsc? And are we likely to find the reasons for
this state of affairs merely in the ultimate purposes of the highest will
that commands directly in this way? One can, without being stubborn,
dispute that the favoured manner of explaining the properties of nature
by citing their uses as a reason will not pass the test as hoped. In regard
to the benefit of the world, it was certainly a matter of complete indifference whether the planetary orbits are completely circular or whether
they are a little eccentric; whether they completely coincide with their
universal plane of reference or may deviate somewhat from it; rather, if
it was needed to be restricted in this kind of correspondence, it would
be best to have them be complete. If it is true what the philosopher said,
that God is constantly practising geometry; if this shines forth even in
the ways of the universal laws of nature, then certainly this rule would 1:338
be completely perceptible in the immediate works of the almighty will
and these would display all the perfection of geometrical precision. The
comets form part of these defectsd of nature. One cannot deny that in
regard to their course and the changes they suffer thereby they are to be
viewed as imperfect members of creation that neither can serve to provide comfortable dwelling places for rational beings nor become useful
to the best of the whole system by, as has been proposed, serving the Sun
as fuel at some stage; for it is certain that most of them would not fulfil
this purpose before the destruction of the entire planetary structure.e In
the doctrine of the direct highest ordering of the world without a natural development from universal laws of nature, such a remark would be
offensive even though it is certain. But in a mechanical manner of explanation the beauty of the world and the revelation of the almighty are
glorified by it in no small degree. Nature, by encompassing all possible
stages of diversity in itself, extends its embrace to all types of perfection
up to nothingness and the defects themselves are a sign of the superfluity
in which its sum total is inexhaustible.
We would believe that the analogies adduced above might overcome
prejudice to the extent that they would make the mechanical origin of
the universef acceptable if there were not certain grounds, taken from
c Mitwirkungen
d Mangel
e planetischen Gebaudes ¨
f Weltgebaudes ¨
285
the nature of the matter itself, that seem to contradict this doctrine completely. The space of the heavens is, as already mentioned several times,
empty, or at least filled with infinitely thin matter that therefore has been
unable to produce any means of impressing common motions into the
heavenly bodies. This difficulty is of such significance and validity that
Newton, who had cause to trust the insights of his philosophy as much
as any mortal, saw himself compelled at this point to give up hope of
resolving, by reference to the laws of nature and the forces of matter, the
impression of the tangential forces attached to the planets, regardless of
all the correspondence that points to a mechanical origin. Although it
is a sad decision for a philosopher to give up the effort of an examination in the case of a matter that is complex and still far removed from
1:339 simple principles and to content himself with referring to the direct will
of God: nonetheless, Newton recognized here the borderline that separates nature from the finger of God, the course of the established laws
of the former from the hint of the latter. After the despair of so great
a philosopher, it would seem to be presumptuous to hope for a happy
continuation in a matter of such difficulty.
However, precisely the same difficulty that deprived Newton of hope
of understanding the orbital forces imparted to the heavenly bodies,
whose direction and determinations make up the systemic character of
the universeg is the source of the doctrine we have presented in the previous chapters. It supports a mechanical doctrine, but one that is far
removed from the one Newton found inadequate and for the sake of
which he rejected all subordinate causes, because he (if I dare to say it)
erred in that he considered it to be the only one among all the possible
ones of its kind. It is quite easy and natural, even by means of Newton’s
difficulty, to arrive at the certainty of the mechanical manner of explanation we have sketched in this treatise by a brief and thorough line of
argument. If we presuppose (as we cannot help but admit) that the above
analogies establish with the greatest certainty that the motions and orbits
of the heavenly bodies that are in harmony and refer to one another in an
orderly manner point to a natural cause as their origin, then this cannot
be the same matter as that which now fills the space of the heavens. Thus
that which formerly filled these spaces and whose motion was the reason
for the present orbits of the heavenly bodies after they had accumulated
into these spheres and thus cleared the spaces that we now see as empty,
or, what flows directly from this, the matter itself of which the planets,
the comets, and indeed the Sun consist must initially have been dispersed
in the space of the planetary systemh and in this state have set themselves
in a motion that they retained when they united themselves into separate
lumps and formed the heavenly bodies that encompass within themselves
g Weltbaues h planetischen Systems
286
all the formerly dispersed material of universal matter.i In this, one is not 1:340
long at a loss to discover the mechanismj that may have set this material
of forming nature into motion. The motor itself that brought about the
unification of the masses, the force of attraction that is an essential part
of matter and therefore is so well suited as the first cause of motion at
the first stirring of nature was its source. The direction that always aims
straight for the centre point in this force is no objection here; for it is
certain that in its vertical motion the fine material of dispersed elements
must have been deflected by the diversity of the attraction points as well
as by the hindrance caused by the mutually transversing lines of direction, into various lateral motions in which a certain law of nature that says
that all matter limiting itself through reciprocal action ultimately arrives
at a state in which one will cause as little change in the other as possible,
has henceforth brought about both the uniformity of direction as well
as the appropriate degrees of velocities that are balanced at every distance according to the central force and by the combination with which
the elements do not attempt to stray above or beneath themselves: all
elements have thus been made to orbit not only to one side but also in
almost parallel and free circles around the common sinking point in the
thin heavenly space. These motions of the parts had to continue afterwards when planetary spheres had formed out of them and exist now into
an unlimited future by the combination of the once imparted tangential
force with the central force. On this so understandable basis rest the
uniformity of directions in the planetary orbits, the precise reference to
a common plane, the moderation of the tangential forces according to
the attraction of the place, the decrease with distance of the precision of
these analogies, and the free deviation of the outermost heavenly bodies
to both sides as well as in the opposing direction. If these signs of reciprocal dependence in the determinations of generation point with evident
certainty to matter originally moved and dispersed through all of space,
then the total absence of any matter in this now empty heavenly space
other than those which comprise the bodies of the planets, the Sun, and
the comets proves that initially these must have been in a state of disper- 1:341
sion themselves. The ease and correctness with which all the phenomena
of the universek have been derived from this assumed principle in the
foregoing chapters completes such a conjecture and gives it a value that
is no longer arbitrary.
The certainty of a mechanical doctrine of the origin of the universe,l
especially ours, is raised to the highest peak of conviction if one considers
the formation of the heavenly bodies themselves, the significance and size
of their masses in terms of the proportion they have in regard to their
i Weltmaterie
j Triebwerk
k Weltbaues
l Weltgebaudes ¨
287
distance from the centre point of gravitation. For firstly the density of
their material, if considered in terms of the whole of their lump, decreases
in constant degrees with the distance from the Sun, a determination that
aims so clearly at the mechanical determinations of the first formations
that no one can ask for anything further. They are constituted of matter
such that those of the heavier kind have received a lower place towards
the common sinking point while those of the lighter kind received a more
distant space, which condition is necessary in all types of generation in
nature. However, in an arrangement flowing directly from the divine
will not the slightest grounds for these relationships is to be found.
For even though it might seem that the more distant spheres ought to
consist of lighter material so that they might feel the requisite effect
from the reduced force of the Sun’s rays; yet this is merely a purpose
that is directed at the composition of the matter found on the surface
and not at the deeper kinds in the interior of the lump, in which the
Sun’s warmth never has any effect and that serve only to bring about
the attraction of the planet which will make the bodies surrounding it
sink towards it and therefore cannot have the slightest relation to the
strength or weakness of the Sun’s rays. Therefore, if one asks why the
densities of the Earth, of Jupiter, and of Saturn as correctly calculated
by Newton, are in the ratio of 400, 94.5 and 64 to each other, it would be
nonsense to ascribe the cause to the intention of God, who moderated
them according to the degrees of the Sun’s warmth; for here our Earth
1:342 can serve as a counterexample for us, where the Sun acts on only such
a slight depth under the surface by its rays that the part of its lump
that must have some relation to it does not amount to one millionth of
the whole, of which the rest is completely irrelevant in regard to this
intention. If therefore the material of which the heavenly bodies consist
has an ordered ratio harmonizing with the distances, and the planets can
now not restrict one another since they are now at a distance from one
another in empty space, then their matter must previously have been in
a state in which they could act upon one another mutually in order to
restrict themselves to the places proportionate to their specific density,
which could not have happened in any way other than that their parts had
been dispersed in the whole space of the system before their formation
and have gained places appropriate to their density in accordance with
the universal laws of motion.
The ratio of size of the planetary masses, which increases with distance, is the second reason that clearly proves the mechanical formation
of the heavenly bodies and especially our theory thereof. Why do the
masses of the heavenly bodies increase approximately with distance? If
one follows a doctrine that ascribes everything to a choice by God, then
there is no intention that can be thought of as to why the more distant
planets must have greater masses other than that, by the great strength
288
of their attraction in their region, they could encompass one or more
moons that are supposed to make a comfortable life for the inhabitants
determined for them. However, this purpose could be achieved just as
well by a great density in the interior of their lump and why did the lightness of the material that results from special reasons, which is counter
to this ratio, have to remain and be exceeded by the advantage of the
volume to such an extent that the mass of those farther away is still more
important than that of those closer? If one ignores the manner in which
these bodies were naturally produced, one will scarcely be able to provide a reason for this ratio, but by taking it into consideration there is
nothing easier than to understand this determination. When the material of all celestial bodies was still spread out in the space of the planetary
system, attraction formed spheres out of these particles, that had without 1:343
doubt to become larger the further the place of their formation was from
that of the universal central body that, as much as possible, limited and
prevented this unification from the centre point of the entire space by a
particularly mighty attraction.
We become aware of the characteristics of this formation of the heavenly bodies out of the basic materials that had been dispersed at the
beginning, taking pleasure at the extent of the intervening spaces that
separate their orbits from one another and must be regarded, according
to this idea, as the empty compartments from which the planets took the
matter for their formation. We see how these spaces between the orbits
have a proportion to the size of the masses that have been formed out
of them. The distance between the orbit of Jupiter and that of Mars is
so great that the area contained in it exceeds that of all the lower planets
combined; but this is worthy of the largest of all the planets, the one
that has greater mass than all the others combined. We cannot attribute
this distance of Jupiter from Mars to the intention that their attractions
should hinder each other as little as possible. For according to such a
reason, the planet between two orbits would always be nearest to the
planet whose attraction when combined with its own can least disturb
both orbits around the Sun, consequently, the one that has the smallest
mass. Now because according to the correct calculations of Newton, the
forcem with which Jupiter can act upon the orbit of Mars is to that which
it exercises on Saturn by their combined attraction as 1/12512 is to 1/200,
we can easily make the calculation how much closer Jupiter would have
to be to the orbit of Mars than to that of Saturn if the distance between
them had been determined by the intention of their external relation
and not by the mechanism of their generation. However, since the facts
are completely different, since in regard to the two orbits that are above
and below it, a planetary orbit is often more distant from that in which
m Gewalt
289
a smaller planet moves than from the orbit of that of a greater mass, but
the extent of the space around the orbit of each planet always has a correct ratio to its mass, it is clear that the manner of generation must have
1:344 determined these ratios and that, because these determinations appear
to be related as the cause and the effects thereof, we will probably be
most correct if we regard the spaces between the orbits as the containers
of that material from which the planets have formed themselves, from
which it follows directly that their size must be proportional to their
masses, which ratio is, however, increased in the case of the more distant
planets by the greater dispersion of elementary matter in these regions
in the initial state. Therefore of two planets that are fairly equal in terms
of mass, the further one must have a greater space for its formation,
that is, a greater distance from the two nearest orbits, both because the
material there was in itself of a specifically lighter type as well as because
it was more dispersed than in the case of the one that formed closer to
the Sun. Therefore, although the Earth together with the Moon does
not yet appear equal to Venus in bodily content, it nonetheless required
a larger space around it for its formation, because it had to form itself
from a more dispersed material than this lower planet. For these reasons
it is to be conjectured regarding Saturn that the sphere in which it forms
will extend much further on the far side than on the side towards the
centre point (just as this applies to almost all the planets); and therefore
the space between the orbit of Saturn and the course of the next planet
beyond it that we can conjecture, will be much further than the one
between it and Jupiter.
Thus everything in the planetary structuren continues by degrees with
correct relations to the initial generating force that was more effective
near the centre point than at a distance, outward to all unlimited distances. The diminution of the impressed shooting force, the deviation
from the most precise correspondence in the direction and placement of
the orbits, the densities of the heavenly bodies, the parsimony of nature
in respect of the space of their formation: All this decreases by degrees
from the centre to the remote distances; all this shows that the first
cause was tied to the mechanical rules of motion and did not act by free
choice.
1:345 However, what shows the natural formation of the heavenly spheres
out of the basic material that was originally dispersed in the space of the
heavens that are now empty as clearly as anything else is the correspondence I borrow from Herr von Buffon which, however, in his theory
does not have by far the usefulness that it has in ours. For according
to his remark, if one adds together those planets whose masses can be
n Weltbaue
290
determined by calculation, namely Saturn, Jupiter, the Earth, and the
Moon, then they deliver a lump the density of which is to the density
of the Sun’s body as 640 to 650, against which, since these are the main
items in the solar system, the remaining planets, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, hardly deserve to be counted; thus one will be rightly astonished
at the remarkable equality that rules between the matter of the entire
planetary structure, if it is regarded as being united in one lump and the
mass of the Sun. It would be irresponsible carelessness to ascribe this
analogy to chance, that among a multiplicity of such infinitely different
matters, of which some are found just on our Earth alone that exceed one
another in density 15 thousand times, but that nonetheless, as a whole,
approach a ratio of 1 to 1; and one must admit that, if one regards the
Sun as a mixture of all kinds of matter separated from one another in
the planetary structure, all of them appear to have formed in a space that
was once filled with uniformly dispersed material and accumulated on
the central body without distinction but that was divided in accordance
with the heights for the formation of the planets. I leave it to those who
cannot accept the mechanical generation of the celestial bodies to explain
this so special correspondence by the motivations of God’s choice where
they can. I want finally to cease basing a matter of such convincing clarity
as is the development of the world structureo on the basis of the forces of
nature on further proofs. If anyone is in a position to remain unmoved in
the face of so much convincing evidence one must either lie too deeply
in the shackles of prejudice or be completely incapable of lifting oneself
above the mass of traditional opinions to the contemplation of the purest
truth. In the meantime we can believe that no one except the stupid, on
whose approval we cannot count, could fail to recognize the correctness 1:346
of this theory if the correspondences that the world structure,p in all
its combinations, has to the benefit of rational creatures, did not seem
to have something more at its basis than mere universal laws of nature.
We also justifiably believe that skilful arrangements directed to a worthy
purpose must have a wise understanding as its origin and we will be fully
satisfied when we consider that, since the natures of things recognize
no original source other than just this one, their essential and universal
characteristicsq must have a natural inclination to consequences that are
proper and correspond well with one another. If therefore we become
aware of arrangements in the constitution of the world that redound to
the reciprocal advantages of creatures, we should not think it strange to
attribute these to a natural consequence of the universal laws of nature,
o Weltgebaude ¨
p Weltbau
q Beschaffenheiten
291
for what flows from these is not the result of blind chance or an irrational
necessity: It is ultimately grounded in the highest wisdom from which
the universal characteristics take their correspondences. One conclusion
is quite correct: If order and beauty shine forth in the constitution of
the world, then there is a God. However, the other is grounded no less:
If this order was able to flow from universal laws of nature, then all of
nature is necessarily an effect of the highest wisdom.
But if anyone insists on recognizing the direct application of divine
wisdom to all the arrangements of nature that encompass harmony and
useful purposes by not considering the development from universal laws
of motion capable of any harmonious consequences, then my advice
would be not to turn one’s eyes upon a single heavenly body in looking
at the world structurer but rather upon the whole to tear oneself out of
this illusion once and for all. If the angled position of the Earth’s axis
against the plane of its annual route through the cherished change of the
seasons is to be a proof of the direct hand of God, then all one needs to
do is to compare this characteristic with the other heavenly bodies; then
one will become aware that it changes in the case of each of them and
that, in this difference, there are some that do not have it at all, such as
1:347 Jupiter for example, whose axis is vertical to the plane of its orbit, and
Mars whose is almost so, both of which enjoy no difference in the seasons and yet are just as much works of the highest wisdom as the others.
The moons accompanying Saturn, Jupiter, and Earth would appear to
be special arrangements of the highest being if the free deviation from
this purpose throughout the whole system of the world structures did
not indicate that nature has brought forth these determinations without
being interrupted in its free behaviour by any extraordinary compulsion.
Jupiter has four moons, Saturn five, Earth one, the remaining planets
none at all, though it seems these are in greater need of them because
of their longer nights than are the former. If one admires the proportionate equality of the tangential forces impressed upon the planets to
the central inclination of their distances as the cause for their orbiting
around the Sun in near-circles and become suitable dwelling places of
rational creatures thanks to the evenness of the warmth provided by the
Sun and sees it as the direct finger of the Almighty, then all at once
one is led back to the universal laws of nature, if one considers that this
planetary characteristic is gradually lost with all stages of diminution
in the depths of the heavens and that precisely the highest wisdom
that had taken pleasure in the moderate motion of the planets, has not
excluded the failings with which the system ends by stopping in complete
r Weltbaues s Weltbaues
292
irregularity and disorder. Nature, despite having an essential determination to perfection and order, embraces all possible changes in the extent
of its multiplicity, even to failings and deviations. It is precisely the same
unlimited fertility of nature that has brought forth the inhabited heavenly spheres as well as the comets, the useful mountains and harmful
cliffs, habitable landscapes and empty deserts, virtues and vices.
2931:349 Universal
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.
part three,
which contains an attempt to compare the inhabitants of the
different planets on the basis of the analogies of nature.
Who knows the relation of all worlds from one part to the other,
Who is familiar with the number of all suns and every planet’s orbit,
who cognizes the various inhabitants of each star,
To him alone it is allowed,
to grasp and to explain to us why things are as they are.
Pope.72Universal 1:351
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.
part three.
Appendix.
On the inhabitants of the planets.
Because I am of the view that it would be a dishonour to the character of
philosophy if one were to use it to maintain, in a kind of thoughtlessness,
free excesses of wit with some apparent truth, even if one were to declare
that this were merely as an amusement, I shall not adduce any propositions in the present essay other than those that can really contribute
to the expansion of our cognition and the probability of which is at the
same time grounded so well that we can hardly prevent ourselves from
regarding it as valid.
Although it may seem that in this type of subjectt the freedom to invent
has no real barriers and that in judging the nature of the inhabitants of
distant worlds we can give free rein to our fantasy with far greater liberty
than a painter in the depiction of plants or animals of undiscovered lands
and that thoughts of this type could be neither properly proved nor disproved; we nonetheless have to admit that the distances of the heavenly
bodies from the Sun include certain relations that contain an essential
influence on the various properties of the thinking natures present there 1:352
in terms of their way of being active or passive in relation to the nature
of the matter with which they are linked, is tied to and dependent on the
number of impressions that the world awakens in them according to the
properties of the relation of their abode to the centre point of attraction
and of heat.
I am of the opinion that it is just not necessary to assert that all planets
must be inhabited, even though it would be nonsense to deny this in
regard to all or even only most of them. In view of the wealth of nature in
which worlds or systems are only specks of dust in the sunlight compared
with the whole of creation, there might well be empty and uninhabited
regions that are not being used completely for the purpose of nature,
namely for the contemplation of rational beings.This would be as though
one were to doubt the wisdom of God by admitting that sandy and
uninhabited deserts occupy large stretches of the Earth’s surface and
t Vorwurfes
295
that there are deserted islands in the oceans where there are no people.
However, a planet is much smaller in respect of the whole of creation
than a desert or island is in respect of the Earth’s surface.
Perhaps not all the heavenly bodies have formed fully yet; it takes
centuries or perhaps thousands of years before a large heavenly body
has reached a firm state of its matter. Jupiter still appears to be in this
conflict. The observable changes in its shape at various times have led
astronomers long ago to suppose the it must suffer great convulsions and
that its surface is not nearly calm enough for it to be a habitable planet.
If it has no inhabitants and will also never have any, what an infinitely
small effort of nature would this be in regard to the immeasurability of all
creation? And would it not be rather a sign of poverty than of superfluity
if it were to be so careful as to demonstrate all its riches in every point
of space?
But we can still assume with greater satisfaction that, even if it is
uninhabited now, it will be when the period of its formation is complete.
Perhaps our Earth existed for a thousand or more years before it was
1:353 constituted so as to support people, animals, and plants. Now, that a
planet arrives at this perfection several thousand years later does not
detract from the purpose of its existence. For just this reason it will also
remain in the perfection of its constitution longer in the future once it
has arrived at it; for there is a certain law of nature: everything that has a
beginning is constantly approaching its end and is closer to it the more
it has moved away from its starting point.
The satirical view of the wit in The Hague who, after reporting the
general news from the realm of the sciences, was able to present in a
ridiculous way the notion of the necessary population of all the celestial bodies, can only be approved of. “Those creatures,” he says, “that
inhabit the forests on the head of a beggar had long regarded their abode
as an immeasurable sphere and themselves as the masterpiece of creation
when one of them, whom heaven had endowed with a finer soul, a little
Fontenelle of his species, suddenly became aware of the head of a nobleman. He immediately called all the wits of his quarter together and said
to them with delight: we are not the only living beings in all of nature;
behold here a new country, more lice live here.”73 If this conclusion
arouses laughter then it is not because it departs so far from the way
humans make judgements; but rather because precisely the same error
that is based on the same cause in the case of human beings seems to
deserve more of an excuse in their case.
Let us judge without prejudice. This insect that expresses the disposition of most people very well both in the way it lives and in its
insignificance, can be used as a comparison with good reason. Because
in its imagination its existence matters infinitely to nature, it considers
the whole of the rest of creation as in vain as far as it does not have its
296
species as a precise goal, as the centre point of its purposes. The human
being, so infinitely removed from the highest stage of beings is so bold as
to allow himself, in a similar delusion, to be flattered by the necessity of
his existence. The infinity of creation encompasses in itself, with equal 1:354
necessity, all natures that its overwhelming wealth produces. From the
most sublime class among thinking beings to the most despised insect,
not one link is indifferent to it; and not one can be absent without the
beauty of the whole, which exists in their interrelationship, being interrupted by it. Meanwhile, everything is determined by universal laws
which nature effects by the connection of its originally implanted forces.
Because it brings forth nothing but propriety and order in its processes,
no single aim can disturb or interrupt its consequences. In its first formation, the generation of a planet was no more than an infinitely small
consequence of its fruitfulness; and now it would be nonsense if their so
well-founded laws should yield to the particular purposes of this atom. If
the constitution of a heavenly body puts obstacles in the way of the population, it will be uninhabited, although in and of itself it would be better
if it were inhabited. The excellence of creation loses nothing thereby
for of all magnitudes, the infinite is the one that is not lessened by the
subtraction of one finite part. It would be as if one were to complain
that the space between Jupiter and Mars is so needlessly empty and that
there are comets that are uninhabited. Indeed that insect may seem to
us as worthless as possible, it is more important to nature to maintain its
entire class than a small number of more excellent creatures, of which
there are infinitely many, even if a particular region or area were to be
cleared of them. Because it is inexhaustible in the creation of both, we
look on with no concern as both are left to the universal laws for their
maintenance and destruction. Has the owner of those inhabited forests
on the head of the beggar ever created greater destruction in the families of this colony than the son of Philip74 did among the families of his
fellow-citizens when his evil genius put it into his head that the world
had been created solely for his sake?
Meanwhile, most of the planets are certainly inhabited and those that
are not will be at some stage. Now what sort of circumstances will be
caused among the various kinds of these inhabitants by the relationship 1:355
of their place in the solar systemu to the centre point from which the
heat that gives life to everything emanates? For it is certain that this
heat, among all the matter of these heavenly bodies, results in certain
relations in their determinations in proportion to their distance. The
human being, who is the one among all rational beings we are most
familiar with, even though his inner constitution is still an unexplored
problem, will have to serve as the basis and general reference point in
u Weltgebaude ¨
297
this comparison. We shall consider him here not from the point of view
of his moral qualities, nor from the physical aspects of his build; we
shall examine only the limitations that his ability to think rationally and
the motion of his body that obeys this ability would suffer as a result
of the constitution of the matter to which he is bound and which is
proportionate to the distance from the Sun. Despite the infinite distance
between the capacity to think and the motion of matter, between the
reasoning mind and the body, it is nonetheless certain that the human
being, who derives all his concepts and ideas from the impressions the
universev stimulates in his soul through his body, depends totally on the
constitution of this matter to which the creator has bound him for both
their clarity as well as the skill to connect and compare them, which we
call the faculty to think.
The human being has been created to receive the impressions and
emotions the world will arouse in him through the body that is the
visible part of his being and the matter of which serves not only the
invisible spirit that inhabits him to impress the first concepts of external
objects but also is indispensable to repeat, to combine, in short to think
1:356 these in the internal action.* In proportion as his body develops, the
abilities of his thinking nature obtain the proper degrees of completion
and do not attain a settled and masculine powerw until the fibres of his
tools have taken on the firmness and durability that is the perfection of
their formation. Those abilities through which he can satisfy the needs
required by his dependence on external things develop early enough
in him. Some human beings remain at this stage of development. The
faculty of combining abstracted concepts and controlling the tendencies
of the passions by the free application of insights comes late, for some
never in their whole lives; but it is weak in all people: It serves the
lower forces that it is supposed to control and the governing of which
constitutes the advantage of his nature. If one regards the life of most
human beings, this creature seems to be created to absorb sap like a plant,
to grow, to reproduce its species, finally to become old and to die. Of
all creatures he achieves the purpose of his being least, because he uses
up his excellent abilities for ends that the other creatures achieve much
more surely and properly with far lesser means. He would also be the
most despicable of all, at least in the eyes of true wisdom, were it not that
* On the basis of psychology it has been established that in virtue of the current constitution in which creation has made soul and body dependent on one another, the former
not only has to take over all the concepts of the universex through the latter’s community and influence but also the exercise of its power of thought itself depends on its
constitution and borrows the requisite ability for it from its assistance.
v Universum
w Vermogen ¨
x Universi
298
the hope of what is to come elevated him and a period of the complete
evolutiony of the powers locked inside him were not in store for him.
If we examine the cause of the obstacles that hold human nature in
such a state of low degradation, it may be found in the coarseness of
the matter into which his spiritual part is sunk, in the rigidity of the
fibres and the sluggishness and immobility of the fluids that ought to
be obedient to its stirrings. The nerves and fluids of his brain supply
him with only coarse and unclear concepts and because he is unable
to balance the stimulation of sensory sensations in the interior of his
faculty of thinking with sufficiently powerful ideas,z he is carried away
by his passions, dulled and disturbed by the tumult of the elements that
maintain his machinery. The effortsa of reason to rise against this and to
expel this confusion by the light of the power of judgement are like the
flashes of sunshine when thick clouds constantly interrupt and darken 1:357
its brightness.
This coarseness of the material and the fabric in the structure of human
nature is the cause of the sluggishness that keeps the soul’s abilities in
constant exhaustionb and powerlessness. The action of reflection and
of ideasc enlightened by reason is an arduous state into which the soul
cannot place itself without resistance and out of which it soon falls back
into the passive state by a natural tendency of the bodily machine since
the sensory stimulations determine and govern all its actions.
This sluggishness of his power of thought that is a result of his dependence on coarse and unwieldy matter is the source not only of vice but
also of error. Prevented by the difficulty associated with the attempts
to disperse the fog of confused concepts and to separate the universal
cognition arising from the comparison of ideas from sensory impressions, it prefers to yield to overhasty approval and contents itself in the
possession of an insight that scarcely allows it to give the sluggishness of
its nature and the resistance of matter even glancing consideration.
In this dependency the intellectual capacities decline together with
the liveliness of the body: when, because of the weakened circulation of
fluids, old age cooks only thick fluids in the body, when the flexibility
of the fibres and the agility in all movements decreases, the powers of
the spirit ossify with a similar fatigue. The sprightliness of thoughts, the
clarity of ideas,d the liveliness of wit and memory become weakened and
cold. Concepts acquired by long experience will to some extent replace
the decline of these powers and reason would betray its inability even
more clearly if the intensity of the passions that require being reined in
by it did not diminish at the same time or even earlier.
y Auswickelung
z Vorstellungen
a Bemuhungen ¨
b Mattigkeit
c Vorstellungen
d Vorstellungen
299
Accordingly, it is clear from this that the powers of the human soul are
restricted and hemmed in by the obstacles of the coarse matter to which
they are most intimately bound, but something even more remarkable
1:358 is that this specific constitution of the material has an essential reference to the degree of influencee with which the Sun enlivens them in
proportion to their distance and prepares them for the performance of
animal economy. This necessary reference to the fire that spreads from
the centre point of the solar systemf in order to maintain matter in the
requisite movement is the basis for an analogy that is posited from just
this between the various inhabitants of the planets; and by means of this
ratio, each class thereof is bound by the necessity of its nature to the
place that has been assigned to it in the universe.g
The inhabitants of the Earth and of Venus could not exchange their
domiciles without the destruction of both. The former whose formation material is proportionate to the degree of heat of their distance
and therefore too light and volatile for an even greater one, would, in
a hotter place, suffer violent motions and a breakdown of their nature
that would arise from the dispersion and desiccation of the fluids and
a violent tension of their elastic fibres; the latter, whose coarser build
and sluggishness of the elements of their formation requires a greater
influence of the Sun, would freeze in a cooler region of the heavens and
decay in lifelessness. Similarly it must be far lighter and more volatile
matters that constitute the body of an inhabitant of Jupiter so that the
slight stirring with which the Sun can act at this distance, can move these
machines just as powerfully as it does in the lower regions, and so that
I can summarize everything in one general concept: The material of
which the inhabitants of different planets, indeed even the animals
and plants on them, are formed must altogether be of a lighter and
finer type and the elasticity of the fibres together with the advantageous arrangement of their build be more perfect the further they
are away from the Sun.
This relationship is so natural and well founded that not only the
motivations of the ultimate purpose lead to them, which in the natural
sciences are generally regarded as only weak reasons, but at the same
time the proportions of the specific constitution of the matter of which
1:359 the planets consist that have been established by Newton’s calculations
as well as by reasons of cosmogony, confirm this, according to which
the material forming a heavenly body is always of a lighter kind in the
case of distant ones than with the nearer ones, which must necessarily
e Hinflusses. Hartenstein reads Einflusses.
f Weltsystems
g Universo
300
result in a similar relationship in the creatures that produce and maintain
themselves on them.
We have established a comparison between the characteristics of the
matter with which the creatures endowed with reason on the planets are
essentially united; and after the introduction of this observation it can
easily be seen that these relationships will have a consequence in regard
to their intellectual abilities as well. If therefore these intellectual abilities have a necessary dependence on the material of the machine they
inhabit, we will be able to conclude with a more than probable conjecture: that the excellence of thinking natures, the sprightliness of
their ideas,h the clarity and liveliness of the concepts they receive
through external impressions, along with the faculty to put them
together, and finally also the agility in the actual exercise, in short,
the entire extent of their perfection stands under a certain rule,
according to which they become more and more excellent and perfect in proportion to the distance of their domiciles from the Sun.
As this proportion has a degree of credibility that is not far removed
from an established certainty, we find an open field for pleasant conjectures arising from a comparison of the properties of these various
inhabitants. Human nature, which occupies as it were the middle rung
on the ladder of beings, sees itself as being between the two extreme
limits of perfection, equally distant from both ends. If the ideai of the
most sublime classes of rational creatures that inhabit Jupiter or Saturn
arouses their jealousy and humiliates them by the knowledge of their own
baseness, then they can be satisfied again and comforted by the sight of
the low stages on the planets Venus and Mercury, which are lowered
far below the perfection of human nature. What an amazing sight! On
the one hand, we saw thinking creatures among whom a Greenlander 1:360
or Hottentot would be Newton, on the other hand, those who would
admire him as an ape.
As the higher beings recently saw,
What not long ago quite remarkably,
A mortal among us did,
And as he unfolded the law of nature: they were amazed,
That such an occurrence was possible through an earthly creature,
And looked at our Newton just as we view an ape.
Pope.75
To what progress in cognition will not the insight of those blessed
beings of the uppermost spheres of heaven reach! What beautiful consequences will this illumination of insights not have on their moral
h Vorstellungen i Vorstellung
301
characteristics! The insights of the understanding, if they possess the
proper degrees of completeness and clarity, have far more lively stimulation than the sensory attractions and are capable of dominating these
victoriously and treading them under foot. How gloriously will not the
divinity, which depicts itself in all creatures, depict itself in these thinking natures that serenely take on its image and reflect it back like a sea
unmoved by the storms of passion! We do not wish to extend these
conjectures beyond the limits marked out for a physical treatise, we
merely note again the analogy adduced above: that the perfection of
the spiritual world as well as of the material world increases and
progresses in the planets from Mercury on to Saturn or perhaps
even beyond it (insofar as there are yet other planets) in a correct sequence of degrees in proportion to their distances from
the Sun.
While this flows from the consequences of the physical relationship of
their domiciles to the centre point of the world partly naturally, partly
is caused appropriately: on the other hand, the real sight of the most
excellent arrangements appropriate for the splendid perfection of these
natures in the upper regions confirms this rule so clearly that it nearly
ought to make a claim to complete conviction. The sprightliness of
actions connected to the advantages of a sublime nature is more suited
1:361 to the rapidly alternating time periods of these spheres than the slowness
of sluggish and imperfect creatures.
Telescopes teach us that the alternation of day and night on Jupiter
occurs in 10 hours. What would an inhabitant of the Earth likely do
with this division if he were placed on that planet? The 10 hours would
hardly suffice for the rest that this coarse machine needs for its recreation
through sleep. What would the preparations for the arrangements of
being awake, dressing, the time spent on eating, not require as a part of
the following time and how would a creature whose actions had happened
so slowly not be distracted and made incapable of anything useful, whose
5 hours of activity were suddenly interrupted by the intervention of an
equally long darkness? By contrast, if Jupiter is inhabited by more perfect
creatures who combine a finer build with more elastic forces and a greater
agility in execution, then one can believe that these 5 hours are just the
same and more for them than what the 12 hours of the day amount to
for the low class of human beings. We know that the need of time is
something relative that cannot be cognized and understood save from
the magnitude of what has to be achieved compared to the speed of the
execution. Therefore the very same time that for one type of creatures
is, as it were, no more than a moment can be a long period for others
in which a great succession of changes unwinds by rapid action. Saturn
has, according to the probable calculation of its rotation, as we have
302
shown above, a much shorter division of day and night and therefore
allows us to conjecture even more excellent abilities in the nature of its
inhabitants.
Finally, everything agrees to confirm the laws adumbrated above.
Nature has evidently spread out its supplies most grandly on the distant side of the world. The moons that compensate the busy beings of
these blessed regions for the deprivation of daylight with an adequate
replacement are supplied there in large numbers and nature appears to
have been careful to provide all assistance to their efficacy so that there
is almost no time for them to prevent them from applying them. Jupiter 1:362
has an obvious advantage over all lower planets in regard to moons, and
Saturn, in turn, over it as its institutions in the beautiful and useful ring
that surrounds it make even greater advantages of its constitution probable; by contrast, the lower planets on which this supply would be wasted
uselessly, whose class borders more closely on the lack of reason, have
not been accorded such advantages at all or only in small measure.
However, one can (here I am anticipating an objection that could
invalidate all this harmony cited above) regard the greater distance from
the Sun, this source of light and life, not as an evil against which the
extensiveness of such arrangements in the more distant planets are only
advanced as a precautionary measure in order to rectify it somewhat,
and object that indeed the upper planets do have a less advantageous
position in the solar systemj and a position that would be detrimental
to the perfection of their arrangements because they receive a weaker
influence from the Sun. For we know that the effect of light and heat is
determined not by their absolute intensity but by the ability of matter
to accept them and more or less resist its drive and that therefore the
very same distance that can be called a temperate climate for a coarser
type of matter would distribute more subtle fluids and be of damaging
violence for them; therefore it takes only a finer material consisting of
more mobile elements to make the distances of both Jupiter and Saturn
from the Sun into a fortuitous position.
Finally, the excellence of the natures in these upper regions of the
heavens appears to be combined by means of a physical connection with
a durability of which it is worthy. Death and decay cannot affect these
excellent creatures as much as they do us lower natures. Precisely the
same sluggishness of matter and coarseness of the material that is the specific principle of the debasement of the lower stages are also the cause
of the tendency they have to decay. When the fluids that nourish an
animal or a human being and make them grow by incorporating themselves between his small fibres and adding to his mass, can no longer
j Weltgebaude ¨
303
1:363 enlarge its vessels and channels at the same time in the spatial extension when growth is complete; then these attaching nourishing fluids,
by precisely the same mechanical drive that is applied to feed the animal,
must narrow and block the aperture of its vessels and, gradually becoming more and more rigid, destroy the structure of the whole machine.
It is to be believed that, although transience gnaws at even the most
perfect natures, the advantage in the fineness of the material, in the elasticity of the vessels and in the lightness and efficacy of the fluids out
of which those more perfect beings inhabiting the distant planets are
formed, nonetheless delays far longer the frailty that is a consequence
of the sluggishness of coarse matter, and provides these creatures with a
longevity proportionate to their perfection, just as the frailty of human
life has a proper relationship to its worthlessness.
I cannot leave this observation without anticipating a doubt that might
arise naturally out of a comparison of these opinions with our earlier
statements. In the arrangement of the solar systemk in terms of the number of satellites that light up the planets of the most distant orbits, of
the velocity of the axial rotation, and of the materials of their constitution proportionate to the Sun’s effect, we have recognized the wisdom
of God which has so beneficially ordered everything for the good of the
rational beings that inhabit them. However, how can one now reconcile
a mechanical doctrine with the teaching of intentions in such a way that
what the highest wisdom itself designed has been delegated for implementation to coarse matter and the regiment of providence to nature
left to its own devices? Is the former not rather an admission that the
arrangement of the solar systeml has not been developed by the universal
laws of the latter?
These doubts can easily be dispersed if we think back to what was
said with the same intention earlier. Must not the mechanics of all natural motions have an essential tendency to many such consequences that
accords with the project of the highest reason in the whole extent of
connections? How can it have aberrant endeavours and an unbounded
dispersion in its activitiesm if all its properties from which these con-
1:364 sequences develop, even have their own determination on the basis of
the eternal idea of the divine understanding in which everything must
necessarily relate to everything and fit together? If one thinks about it
carefully, how can one justify a manner of judgement that regards nature
as an offensive subject which can only be kept in the bounds of order and
communal harmony by means of a kind of force that places restraints
k Weltbaues
l Weltbaues
m Beginnen
304
on its free conduct unless one thinks that it is a self-sufficient principle
whose properties recognize no cause and which God attempts to coerce
as well as possible into the plan of his intentions? The better we get
to know nature, the more will we gain the insight that the universal
characteristics of things are not foreign to and separate from each other.
We shall be adequately convinced that they have essential affinities
through which, by themselves, they prepare to support each other in
the establishment of perfect constitutions, namely the interaction of
the elements for the beauty of the material world and yet also at the
same time for the advantages of the spiritual one and that altogether the
individual natures of things in the field of eternal truths among themselves already constitute, as it were, a system in which one relates to
the other; we shall also become aware that the affinity is a part of them
from their common origin out of which they all drew their essential
determinations.
And now to apply this repeated observation to the purpose at hand:
precisely the same universal laws of motion that have accorded the highest planets a place distant from the centre point of attraction and inertia
in the solar systemn have, in so doing, at the same time put them into the
most advantageous constitution to begin their formations furthest away
from the reference point of the coarse matter and with greater freedom
as well; but, at the same time, they also have placed them in a regular relation to the influence of heat which spreads out from the centre
point according to the same law. Now since it is just these determinations that have made the formation of celestial bodies in these distant
regions less restricted, the generation of motions dependent on them
faster and, in brief, made the system more proper, since finally, the spiritual beings have a necessary dependence on matter to which they are 1:365
personally bound, then it is no wonder that the perfection of nature has
been effected from both places in a single connection of causes and for
the same reasons. This agreement is therefore, on close consideration,
nothing sudden or unexpected and because the latter beings have been
merged into the general constitution of material nature by a similar principle, the spiritual world will be more perfect in the distant spheres for
the very reasons as the bodily one is.
Thus everything in the whole extent of nature is connected in an
uninterrupted graduated sequence by the eternal harmony that refers all
links to each other. God’s perfections have revealed themselves clearly
in our stages and are no less glorious in the lowest classes than in the
more sublime ones.
n Weltsystem
305
What a chain, which from God its beginning takes, what natures,
From heavenly and earthly [natures], from angels [and] humans down to
animals,
From seraphim to the worm! O distance that the eye can never,
Attain and contemplate,
From the Infinite to you, from you to nought!
Pope.76
So far we have continued the conjectures faithfully along the thread
of the physical relations that has kept them on the path of a rational
credibility. Shall we allow ourselves a further digression from this path
into the field of fantasy?Who can show us the border where well-founded
probability ends and arbitrary fictions begin? Who is so bold as to dare
an answer to the question as to whether sin exercises its domination in
other spheres of the solar systemo as well or whether virtue alone holds
sway there?
The stars perhaps are a seat of transfigured spirits
As here vice rules, there virtue is the master.
v. Haller.77
Does not a certain mean need to exist between wisdom and foolishness
for the unfortunate ability of being able to sin? Who knows whether the
inhabitants of those distant celestial bodies are not too noble and too
1:366 wise to lower themselves to the foolishness that resides in sin while
those inhabiting the lower planets are attached too firmly to matter and
equipped with far too few spiritual abilities to be permitted to bear the
responsibility for their actions before the judgement seat of justice? In
this way the Earth and perhaps also Mars (so that we are not deprived
of the miserable consolation of having companions in misery) alone lie
in the dangerous middle zone where the temptation of sensual delights
has a strong power to lead astray against the domination of the spirit
which, however, cannot not deny the capacity by which it is in a position
to resist them if it did not rather please its sluggishness to allow itself
to be carried away by them, where there is thus the dangerous mean
between weakness and strength, where precisely the same advantages
that raise him above the lower classes place him at a height from which
he can sink infinitely far beneath them again. In fact, the two planets
Earth and Mars are the middle-most members of the planetary system
and we can perhaps suspect with some probability a medium position of
the physical as well as of the moral characteristics between the two endpoints. However, I would prefer to leave this consideration to those who
find in themselves greater comfort in the face of unprovable knowledge
and greater inclination to take responsibility for it.
o Weltbaues
306
conclusion.
We are not even properly familiar with what a human being actually
is, even though consciousness and our senses should inform us about
it; how much less will we be able to imagine what he will become in
the future! Nonetheless the human soul’s desire for knowledge grasps
greedily for this object so distant from it and strives to shed some light
in such obscure cognition.
Should the immortal soul remain forever attached to this point in
space, to our Earth for the whole infinity of its future duration, which 1:367
is not interrupted by the grave itself, but only changed? Should it never
obtain a closer view of the remaining wonders of creation? Who knows
whether it is not intended to get to know at close quarters those distant
spheres of the solar systemp and the excellence of their arrangements
that already excite its curiosity so much from a distance? Perhaps some
further spheres of the planetary system will form around them in order to
prepare new places for us to reside in other heavens, after the completed
passage of time prescribed for our stay here. Who knows, perhaps the
satellites orbiting around Jupiter will light our way in the future?
It is permissible, it is proper to amuse oneself with such ideas; but
no one will base one’s hope for the future on such uncertain images of
the imagination. After vanity has taken its part of human nature, the
immortal spirit will rise up in a swift flightq over all things temporal and
continue its existence in a new relation to all of nature which arises out
of a closer connection with the highest being. At that time in the future,
this enhanced nature, which carries the source of happiness within itself,
will no longer disperse itself among external objects to find comfort with
them there. The whole sum of creatures that has a necessary harmony
with the approval of the highest original being, must also have it for its
own and will not move it other than with eternal satisfaction.
Indeed, when one has filled one’s mind with such observations and
with the preceding ones, the view of the starry sky on a clear night
gives one a kind of pleasure that only noble souls feel. In the universal
stillness of nature and the calmness of the senses the immortal spirit’s
hidden faculty of cognition speaks an ineffable language and provides
undeveloped concepts that can certainly be felt but not described. If,
among the thinking creatures of this planet, there are any despicable
beings who, in spite of all the delights with which so great an object can
attract them, are yet in a position to tie themselves firmly to the service
of vanity, how unfortunate is this sphere that it has been able to bring 1:368
up such miserable creatures! But how fortunate is it, on the other hand,
because under the most acceptable of conditions a way has been opened
for it to attain bliss and sublimity that is exalted infinitely far above the
benefits that the most advantageous arrangement of nature can attain in
all celestial bodies