What is the meaning of ascetic ideals? In artists, nothing, or too
much; in philosophers and scholars, a kind of "flair" and instinct for
the conditions most favourable to advanced intellectualism; in women,
at best an _additional_ seductive fascination, a little _morbidezza_
on a fine piece of flesh, the angelhood of a fat, pretty animal; in
physiological failures and whiners (in the _majority_ of mortals),
an attempt to pose as "too good" for this world, a holy form of
debauchery, their chief weapon in the battle with lingering pain and
ennui; in priests, the actual priestly faith, their best engine of
power, and also the supreme authority for power; in saints, finally
a pretext for hibernation, their _novissima gloriæ cupido_, their
peace in nothingness ("God"), their form of madness.

But in the very fact that the ascetic ideal has meant so much to
man, lies expressed the fundamental feature of man's will, his
_horror vacui: he needs a goal_--and he will sooner will nothingness
than not will at all.--Am I not understood?--Have I not been
understood?--"Certainly not, sir?"--Well, let us begin at the beginning.


2.

What is the meaning of ascetic ideals? Or, to take an individual
case in regard to which I have often been consulted, what is the
meaning, for example, of an artist like Richard Wagner paying homage
to chastity in his old age? He had always done so, of course, in a
certain sense, but it was not till quite the end, that he did so in
an ascetic sense. What is the meaning of this "change of attitude,"
this radical revolution in his attitude--for that was what it was?
Wagner veered thereby straight round into his own opposite. What is
the meaning of an artist veering round into his own opposite? At
this point (granted that we do not mind stopping a little over this
question), we immediately call to mind the best, strongest, gayest,
and boldest period, that there perhaps ever was in Wagner's life: that
was the period, when he was genuinely and deeply occupied with the
idea of "Luther's Wedding." Who knows what chance is responsible for
our now having the _Meistersingers_ instead of this wedding music?
And how much in the latter is perhaps just an echo of the former? But
there is no doubt but that the theme would have dealt with the praise
of chastity. And certainly it would also have dealt with the praise
of sensuality, and even so, it would seem quite in order, and even
so, it would have been equally Wagnerian. For there is no necessary
antithesis between chastity and sensuality: every good marriage, every
authentic heart-felt love transcends this antithesis. Wagner would, it
seems to me, have done well to have brought this _pleasing_ reality
home once again to his Germans, by means of a bold and graceful "Luther
Comedy," for there were and are among the Germans many revilers of
sensuality; and perhaps Luther's greatest merit lies just in the fact
of his having had the courage of his _sensuality_ (it used to be
called, prettily enough, "evangelistic freedom "). But even in those
cases where that antithesis between chastity and sensuality does exist,
there has fortunately been for some time no necessity for it to be in
any way a tragic antithesis. This should, at any rate, be the case with
all beings who are sound in mind and body, who are far from reckoning
their delicate balance between "animal" and "angel," as being on the
face of it one of the principles opposed to existence--the most subtle
and brilliant spirits, such as Goethe, such as Hafiz,> have even seen
in this a _further_ charm of life. Such "conflicts" actually allure
one to life. On the other hand, it is only too clear that when once
these ruined swine are reduced to worshipping chastity--and there
are such swine--they only see and worship in it the antithesis to
themselves, the antithesis to ruined swine. Oh what a tragic grunting
and eagerness! You can just think of it--they worship that painful
and superfluous contrast, which Richard Wagner in his latter days
undoubtedly wished to set to music, and to place on the stage! "_For
what purpose, forsooth?_" as we may reasonably ask. What did the swine
matter to him; what do they matter to us?


3.

At this point it is impossible to beg the further question of what he
really had to do with that manly (ah, so unmanly) country bumpkin,
that poor devil and natural, Parsifal, whom he eventually made a
Catholic by such fraudulent devices. What? Was this Parsifal really
meant _seriously_? One might be tempted to suppose the contrary, even
to wish it--that the Wagnerian Parsifal was meant joyously, like a
concluding play of a trilogy or satyric drama, in which Wagner the
tragedian wished to take farewell of us, of himself, above all of
tragedy, and to do so in a manner that should be quite fitting and
worthy, that is, with an excess of the most extreme and flippant parody
of the tragic itself, of the ghastly earthly seriousness and earthly
woe of old--a parody of that _most crude phase_ in the unnaturalness
of the ascetic ideal, that had at length been overcome. That, as I
have said, would have been quite worthy of a great tragedian; who like
every artist first attains the supreme pinnacle of his greatness when
he can look _down_ into himself and his art, when he can _laugh_ at
himself. Is Wagner's Parsifal his secret laugh of superiority over
himself, the triumph of that supreme artistic freedom and artistic
transcendency which he has at length attained. We might, I repeat,
wish it were so, for what can Parsifal, _taken seriously_, amount to?
Is it really necessary to see in it (according to an expression once
used against me) the product of an insane hate of knowledge, mind,
and flesh? A curse on flesh and spirit in one breath of hate? An
apostasy and reversion to the morbid Christian and obscurantist ideals?
And finally a self-negation and self-elimination on the part of an
artist, who till then had devoted all the strength of his will to the
contrary, namely, the _highest_ artistic expression of soul and body.
And not only of his art; of his life as well. Just remember with what
enthusiasm Wagner followed in the footsteps of Feuerbach. Feuerbach's
motto of "healthy sensuality" rang in the ears of Wagner during the
thirties and forties of the century, as it did in the ears of many
Germans (they dubbed themselves "_Young_ Germans"), like the word of
redemption. Did he eventually _change his mind_ on the subject? For it
seems at any rate that he eventually wished to _change his teaching_
on that subject ... and not only is that the case with the Parsifal
trumpets on the stage: in the melancholy, cramped, and embarrassed
lucubrations of his later years, there are a hundred places in which
there are manifestations of a secret wish and will, a despondent,
uncertain, unavowed will to preach actual retrogression, conversion,
Christianity, mediævalism, and to say to his disciples, "All is vanity!
Seek salvation elsewhere!" Even the "blood of the Redeemer" is once
invoked.