THE ENGLISH REFORM BILL
[283] THE prime object of the Reform Bill now [1831] lying before
the English Parliament is to bring justice and fairness into the
allotment of the parts played by the different classes and divisions
of the people in the election of members of Parliament, and to do
this by substituting a greater symmetry for the most bizarre and
haphazard anomalies and inequalities which prevail at present.
There are numbers, localities, private interests, which are to be
ordered differently; nevertheless, it is on the nobility, the very
heart and vital principle of the constitution and condition of Great
Britain, that this alteration presses in fact. This is the aspect of the
present Bill which deserves special notice. And the aim of this
essay is to assemble here these higher aspects of the matter which
have been discussed in the parliamentary debates up till now. The
fact that in the House of Commons the Bill encountered opposition
from so many members, and that the second reading was carried
by the chance of one vote, cannot cause surprise, because it is just
the powerful aristocratic interests in the Lower House that are to
be attacked and reformed. If the Bill were opposed by all those
who themselves or whose constituents -are to lose their former
prerogative and influence, there would at once be a most decided
majority against the Bill. The promoters of the Bill could rely only
on this, that now a sense of justice had mastered the obstinacy of
privilege in those whose advantage lay in those prerogatives-a
sense that acquired great strength from ·the anxious impression
[284] produce9 on interested Members of Parliament by the neighbouring example of France. [Moreover] the almost universal
opinion in England about the need of reform always tended to
make itself felt as a motive of the first importance in Parliament.
But even if public opinion in Great Britain were almost always for
reform to the extent, or within the limits, proposed in the Bill, we
would still have to be allowed.to examine the substance of what
this opinion desires, all the more so because in recent times we have
not infrequently experienced that its demands have proved to be
impracticable, or, if practicable, pernicious, and that public opinion
has now turned just as vigorously against what immediately before
it had vigorously demanded and appeared to welcome. The ancients
who had belonged to democracies from their youth onwards, and
who had lived through a long series of experiences in them and
applied their thoughtful reflection to these, had different views
about popular opinion from those that are now current on more
or less a priori grounds.
(285] (1. THE NECESSITY OF A REFORM OF THE FRANCHISE]
The proposed reform starts from the undisputed fact that the
bases on which was determined the share held by the different
counties and boroughs in England in parliamentary seats had been
completely altered in the course of time, [and] that therefore the
'rights to this share' had become completely at variance with the
principles of these bases and contradictory to everything that in
this part of a constitution appears to the simplest common sense
as obviously right and fair. One of the most important opponents
of the Bill, Robert Peel, grants 1 that it may seem easy to expatiate
on the anomalies and absurdity of the English constitution; and its
follies are expounded at length in all their details in the parliamentary debates and in the newspapers. Therefore it may suffice
here to recall the chief points, namely that the right of electing to
seats in Parliament has been retained by thinly populated towns
or even by their councillors (who co-opt their colleagues) alone
without their fellow citizens, and thus by places reduced to only
two or three residents (and leaseholders at that), while many cities
that have prospered and flourished in recent years and have xoo,ooo
inhabitants or more have no right of election; and between these
extremes there is still the greatest variety of other inequalities.
The first result is that the election to a large number of parliamentary seats is in the hands of a small number of individuals. It
is calculated that a majorjty of the House is at the disposal of
1so peers. Secondly, a still more significant number of seats is
purchasable-some of them [286] a recognized marketable commodity so that the possession of one of these seats is acquired by
bribery or the formal payment of a specific sum to the electors or
in general is reduced in numerous other ways to a matter of cash.
1 The reference is probably to Peel's speech of 3 March 1831 (Speeches,
vol. ii, p. z8o). 297
It will be difficult to point anywhere to a similar symptom of
a people's political corruption. Montesquieu1 pronounced virtue,
the unselfish sense of duty to the state, to be the principle of the
democratic constitution. In the English constitution the democratic element has an important sphere in the people's participation in the election of members of the Lower House, of the
politicians who have the most decisive role in settling public
affairs. Of course it is the almost unanimous view of the pragmatic
historians2 that if in any nation private interest and a dirty monetary
advan age becomes the preponderating ingredient in the election
of Ministers of state, then the situation is to be regarded as the
forerunner of the inevitable loss of that nation's political freedom,
the ruin of its constitution and even of the state. To counter the
Englishman's pride in his freedom, we Germans may well cite the
fact that even if the old constitution of the German Empire had
likewise become a formless aggregate3 of particular rights, it was
only the external bond of the German states, and political life
within these, so far as concerned elections to their Diets4 and the
corresponding franchise, was free from the absurdity of the English system, and no less free from the [political] corruption that
permeates every class of the English people. Now even if alongside
the democratic element in England the aristocratic is an extremely
important power; even if purely aristocratic governments like
Venice, Genoa, Berne, &c., are reproached with finding their
security and strength by submerging their subjects in universal
sensuality and moral corruption; and even if it be reckoned as
freedom to cast one's vote entirely on caprice, which motive is
supposed to determine the will; [287] still it must be recognized
as a good sign of the reawakening of a moral temper in the English
people that one of the feelings which the need of a reform brings
with it is an antipathy to the [political] depravity [to which I have
referred]. Equally, however, we can see that the right way to
pursue improvement is not by the moral route of using ideas,
admonitions, associations of isolated individuals, in order to
counteract the system of corruption and avoid being indebted to
it, but by the alteration of institutions. The common prejudice of
1 Esprit des Lois, vol. iii, p. 3, and Hegel, Ph.d.R., § 273.
2 See Hegel, Ph.d.R., § 3, and note 15 thereto in Eng. tr. (Oxford, 1942).
3 See above, The German Constitution, e.g. [9-10].
4 Reading Landstiinden with Boumann.
inertia, namely to cling always to the old faith in the excellence of
an institution, even if the present state of affairs derived from it is
altogether corrupt, has thus at last caved in. A more thoroughgoing reform is all the more required in that, at the opening of
every new Parliament, the opportunity presented by bribery petitions has given rise to proposals for improving [the system], but
they have remained without any significant success. For example,
the recent and most proper proposal to take away the franchise
from one place where bribery has been proved and to transfer it
to the city of Birmingham, and thereby to display an equitable
inclination to redress the most striking inequality with extreme
moderation, was manceuvred off the field by the parliamentary
tactics of Ministers, especially of Peel, the Minister otherwise
praised for his liberal views. 1 A great step forward at the opening
session of the present Parliament has thus been reduced to forbidding candidates to distribute any more badges to electors
favourably disposed to them. Since the great majority of members
of both Houses, who are the judges in bribery cases,z are involved
in the system of corruption, while the majority of members of the
Lower House owe their seats to this system, charges of bribery
against an enfranchised place, and their investigation and trial,
have been exposed as downright farces and even as shameless
procedures, too publicly and too loudly for anything to be expected
along that route now except redress in isolated instances.
[288] The other usual ground taken in Parliament against attacks
on positive rights is the [appeal to the] wisdom of our ancestors,
but this appeal cannot be upheld in this matter. This wisdom is
to be ascribed to the distribution of the parliamentary franchise
according to the then existing population of counties, cities, and
boroughs, or according to their importance in other respects; and
there is far too sharp a contrast between that and what has come
to be the modern population, wealth, and importance of districts
and interests. Another point not broached in discussion is the loss
of capital which so many individuals [would] suffer and the loss of
income of a still greater number; the monetary gain derived from
direct bribery is illegal, though all classes are interested in it either
1 This is not quite fair to Peel. This involved matter, i.e. proposals to transfer
Penryn to Manchester and East Retford to Birmingham, is discussed inN. Gash,
Mr. Secretary Peel (London, 1961), pp. 470-1 et al.
2 Hegel is wrong here. The House of Lords had no jurisdiction in electoral
cases, which were tried solely by a committee of the Commons. 299
as bribers or bribed. The capital value lost to the boroughs which
are to be deprived of their franchise is based on the fact that, in
the course of time, a political right has been transformed into
a pecuniary asset. Although the acquisition [of a seat], at a price
which is now getting lower, has happened just as bona fide as the
purchase of slaves, and although under new laws what the English
Parliament considers carefully in such a case is the maintenance
of real property, and, in the event of a loss occurring, compensation
accordingly, no claims of this sort have been made in the present
discus~ions, nor has any difficulty been raised on this score. 1 But
this circumstance may be an effective motive against the Bill for
a number of Members of Parliament.
On the other hand another legal principle especially characteristic of England is indeed attacked by the Bill. This is the
character of 'positivity' which preponderates in the institutions of
English law, public and private alike. It is true that every right and
its corresponding law is in form something positive, ordained, and
instituted by the supreme power in the state, something to which
obedience must be given just because it is a statute. But at no time
more than the present has the general intelligence been led to
distinguish between whether rights are purely positive in their
material content or whether they are also inherently right and
rational. In no constitution is judgement so strongly induced [289]
to attend to this distinction as in the English, now that the continental nations have allowed themselves to be imposed on for so
long by declamations about English ·freedom and by England's
pride in her system of law. It is well known that the latter rests
entirely on particular rights, freedoms, privileges conferred, sold,
,presented by or extorted from kings and Parliament on special
occasions. Magna Charta aD:_d the Bill of Rights, which concern
the most important foundations of the English constitution and
which have received further definition in subsequent parliamentary
legislation, are concessions wrung [from the Crown] by force, or
else acts of grace, agreements, &c., and constitutional rights have
stuck by the form of private rights, which they had at their origin,
and therefore by the accident of their content. This inherently
' While English legislation normally provided for compensation when it
encroached on private property, the Reform Bill did not propose any compensation to the owners or other interested parties in boroughs selected for
disfranchisement. Hence parliamentary representation was in fact not regarded
in England as a species of private property.JOO 
disconnected aggregate of positive provisions has not yet undergone the development and recasting which has been carried out
in the civilized states of the Continent, and which the German
provinces, for example, have enjoyed for a longer or shorter
period.
Hitherto England has lacked the features which constitute the
major part of these glorious and fortunate advances. Amongst these
features the chief is the scientific remodelling of law, whereby, on
the one hand, general principles have been applied to and carried
through the particular specifications [of law] and their complexities,
while on the other hand concrete and special cases have been
reduced to simpler provisions. This remodelling has made it possible for the newer continental states to produce statute books ao.d
political institutions framed preponderantly on general principles,
·a process in which, so far as concerns the contents of justice,
common sense and sound reasoning have been allowed their proper
share. Next, a still more important feature in the transformation
of law must be mentioned-the deep insight of princes in making
the guiding stars of their legislative activity, with which the
monarch's due power is linked, such principles as the state's wellbeing, the happiness of their subjects, and the general welfare, as
well as and above all the sense of an absolute justice, and in doing
this with a view to making way for these principles and giving
them reality in face of merely positive privileges, traditional private
interest, and the stupidity of the masses. [290] The reason why
England is so remarkably far behind the other civilized states of
Europe in institutions derived from true rights is simply that there
the governing power lies in the hands of those possessed of so
many privileges which contradict a rational constitutional law and
true legislation.
This is the situation on which the projected reform is meant to
have an important effect. Not, however, that it has been intended
to produce this effect by enlarging the power of the monarchical
element in the constitution; on the contrary, if the Bill is not to
meet with universal disapproval immediately, jealousy of the power
of the throne, that most stubborn of English prejudices, must
remain untouched, and the proposed measure owes part of its
popularity instead to the fact that by it the Crown's influence is
seen to be further weakened. What rouses the greatest interest is the
fear in some quarters, the hope in others, that the reform of the
franchise will bring in its train other reforms of substance. The
English principle of 'positivity' on which, as I have said, the whole
of English law rests, does through the Bill actually suffer a shock
which in England is entirely new and unheard of, and one instinctively suspects that more far-reaching changes will issue from this
subversion of the formal basis of the existing order.
[2. INSTANCES OF ABUSES TO BE REMOVED]
Some expressions of these points of view have occurred in the
course• of parliamentary debates, though rather cursorily. The
promoters and friends of the Bill may really believe that it will
not lead on to anything beyond the point it reaches itself or, in
order not to irritate the opposition more seriously, they may not
let their hopes become more vocal, just as the opposition too may
not represent their real concern as a prize of victory; because they
own much, they have, of course, much to lose. But the fact that no
more is said in Parliament about this more materialistic aspect of
reform [291] is due in great part to the convention that, when
important matters are before this assembly, the bulk of the time is
taken up by members' explanations oftheir personal position; they
give their opinions not as business men but as privileged persons
and as orators. In England a broad field for reform is open, comprising the most important aims of civil and political society. The
necessity for reform begins to be felt. Something of what has been
indicated [above] on this subject may serve as an example of the
amount of work which is over and done with elsewhere and which
still waits to be done in England.
Amongst the expectations of material improvements there is
above all the hope for economies in administration. But however
often this theme is started by the opposition as something absolutely necessary for easing the pressure [of taxation] and the
general misery of the people, every time the statement is repeated
that all efforts to this end have hitherto gone for nothing, and that
the hope held out to the people by Ministers, and even in the
speech from the throne, has every time been deceived. These
declamations have been repeated in similar words every time taxes
have been reduced in the last fifteen years. For finally fulfilling the
people's hopes better prospects are held out in a reformed Parliament, i.e. in the greater independence of a grea~er number of302 
members on the Ministry, whose weakness and whose hardheartedness to the people and its interests, &c., has been blamed
for a continuing extravagant expenditure. But if we bring under
consideration the chief heads of public expenditure in England, it
appears that there is no great room for economy: first, interest payments on the enormous national debt cannot be reduced; secondly,
the cost of the army and navy, pensions included, is most closely
connected not only with the political situation, and especially with
the interest of trade, the basis of England's existence, and the
danger of internal revolts, but also with the habits of military and
naval men and their demand not to fall behind other classes in
good living and luxury; and thus in this field there can be no cuts
without risk. The calculations made public as a result of the outcry
against the so notorious sinecures [292] have shown that even their
total abolition, not to be effected without great injustice, would be
nothing to speak of. But there is no need to expatiate on these
material matters but only to notice that the indefatigable pains that
Hume 1 took to examine the finances down to the last detail have
gone all along without result. This cannot be ascribed solely to the
corruption of the parliamentary aristocracy and the Ministry's
obsequiousness to it, needing its help as it did-that aristocracy
which procures for itself and its relatives all sorts of gains through
sinecures, and, in general, through lucrative posts in the administration, the army, the Church, and the court. The relatively very small
number of votes which proposals for reducing expenditure usually
gain points to a slender hope in the possibility of, or to a faint
interest in, such lightening of the so-called general pressure [of
taxation] against which Members of Parliament are of course protected by their wealth. That fraction of them which counts as
independent tends to be on the side of the Ministry, and this
independence sometimes shows itself inclined to go farther than
would have been expected from its usual attitude and the reproaches
of the opposition. This happens on occasions when the Ministry
expressly displays a special interest in a financial grant. For
example, some years ago an extra salary of £x,ooo proposed by
the Ministry with great vigour for Huskisson, 2 who was so highly
1 Joseph Hume (1777-I85s), who took 'the sense of the House for a saving
of eighteenpence' and added 'retrenchment' to his radical party's watchword.
• When he became President of the Board of Trade in 1823 he resigned his
agency for the Cape, a salaried office of £1,200 per annum.
regarded and who gave up a lucrative post because of his official
business at the Board of Trade, was voted down by a large majority.
So also the same thing has frequently happened with proposals
for increasing the establishment of the royal princes which, for
England, is not extravagantly assessed. In these cases affecting a
personality and a sense of dignity, passion has overcome the lukewarmness usually evinced by Parliament for economies.
This much at least is clear, that no Reform Bill can directly annul
the causes of high taxation in England. The example of England
and France might in fact lead to the induction that countries in
which the administration of the state depends on the assent of
assemblies [293] chosen by the people are those most heavily
burdened by taxes. 1 In France, where the aim of the English
Reform Bill-extending the franchise to a more considerable number of citizens-has to a large extent been achieved, the budget has
been compared, in French newspapers, with a hopeful child who
is to make significant progress daily. In order to hit upon radical
measures for diminishing the oppressive character of the English
political administration, it would have been necessary to trespass
too deeply on the inner constitution of particular rights. No power
is available, having regard to the enormous wealth of private individuals, to make serious arrangements for diminishing the prodigious national debt substantially. The exorbitant cost of the
chaotic administration of justice (which makes the road to court
open to the rich alone), the poor-ratP. which a ministry could not
introduce in Ireland where need and·justice alike demanded it,
the utilization of ecclesiastical revenues (to be further mentioned
below), and many other great branches of society, presuppose, for
the making of any change, other changes in the power of the state
than those stipulated in the Reform Bill.
Occasionally reference has been made in Parliament to the abolition of ecclesiastical tithes, manorial rights, and the game laws which
has come about in Franee. All this, it is said, would come about under
the auspices of a patriotic king and a reformed Parliament. And the
drift ofthe argument seemsto characterizethe cancellationofrights of
that kind as a lamentable overthrow of the whole constitution, quite
apart from the fact that it had had appalling anarchy as its consequence in France. We all know that in other states rights of this
kind have vanished without any such consequences; not only so, but
1 Cf. Ph.d.R., Zusatz to § 302.
their abolition is regarded as an important basis of increased welfare
and essential freedom. Therefore something more may be adduced
here about them.
First, as to tithes, the oppressive character of this tax has been
obvious in England for long past. A special hatred is generally
directed against a tax of this kind, but in England [294] this hatred
cannot astonish anyone, since in many districts there the clergyman has collected for him every day every tenth jug of milk from
the cowherds, a tenth of the day's eggs, &c. Moreover, this tax has
been cavilled at on the score of unfairness, because the more the
produce of the ground is increased by industry, time, and expenditure, the higher the tax rises, with the result that the improvement
of agriculture, in which large capital resources have been sunk in
England, is burdened with a tax instead of being encouraged. The
tithe belongs to the Church of England; in other countries, Protestant ones especially, either recently or long ago (in Prussian
territory more than a century ago) tithes have been abolished, or
made redeemable, unostentatiously and unobtrusively without
either spoliation or injustice. The ecclesiastical revenues have been
deprived of their oppressive character and they have been raised
in a more appropriate and becoming manner.
But, in England, the nature of the original justification of tithe
is essentially fading away, or is turned upside down for other
reasons. The application of tithe for the maintenance of religious
doctrine and the upbuilding and support of the Church has mostly
been transformed into a sort of private property revenue. The
clergyman's office has the character of a living and the duties of it
have changed into rights to an income. Apart from the fact that
a number of lucrative benefices, [such as] canonries, entail no
official duties at all, it is only too well known how common it is
for the English clergy to occupy themselves with anything but the
functions of their office, with hunting, &c., and idleness of other
kinds, to dissipate. the rich revenues of their places in foreign
travel, and to hand over their official duties to a poor curate for
a pittance that hardly saves him from dying of hunger. A comprehensive idea of the connexion between holding a benefice and
drawing its revenues on the one hand and the.moral conduct and
the fulfilment of official duties on the other is afforded by an
example that was the subject of court proceedings a few years ago.
