History of Philosophy
INAUGURAL ADDRES

DELIVERED AT HEIDELBERG ON THE 28TH OCTOBER, 1816


GENTLEMEN,—Since the History of Philosophy is to be the subject of
these lectures, and to-day I am making my first appearance in this
University, I hope you will allow me to say what satisfaction it
gives me to take my place once more in an Academy of Learning at this
particular time. For the period seems to have been arrived at when
Philosophy may again hope to receive some attention and love—this
almost dead science may again raise its voice, and hope that the world
which had become deaf to its teaching, may once more lend it an ear.
The necessities of the time have accorded to the petty interests of
every-day life such overwhelming attention: the deep interests of
actuality and the strife respecting these have engrossed all the powers
and the forces of the mind—as also the necessary means—to so great
an extent, that no place has been left to the higher inward life, the
intellectual operations of a purer sort; and the better natures have
thus been stunted in their growth, and in great measure sacrificed.
Because the spirit of the world was thus occupied, it could not look
within and withdraw into itself. But since this stream of actuality
is checked, since the German nation has cut its way out of its most
material conditions, since its nationality, the basis of all higher
life, has been saved, we may hope that, in addition to the State, which
has swallowed up all other interests in its own, the Church may now
resume her high position—that in addition to the kingdom of the world
to which all thoughts and efforts have hitherto been directed; the
Kingdom of God may also be considered. In other words, along with the
business of politics and the other interests of every-day life, we may
trust that Science, the free rational world of mind, may again flourish.

We shall see in the History of Philosophy that in other European
countries in which the sciences and the cultivation of the
understanding have been prosecuted with zeal and with respect,
Philosophy, excepting in name, has sunk even from memory, and that
it is in the German nation that it has been retained as a peculiar
possession. We have received the higher call of Nature to be the
conservers of this holy flame, just as the Eumolpidæ in Athens had
the conservation of the Eleusinian mysteries, the inhabitants of the
island of Samothrace the preservation and maintenance of a higher
divine service; and as, earlier still, the World-spirit reserved to the
Jewish nation the highest consciousness that it should once more rise
from thence as a new spiritual force. We have already got so far, and
have attained to a seriousness so much greater and a consciousness so
much deeper, that for us ideas and that which our reason justifies, can
alone have weight; to speak more plainly, the Prussian State is a State
constituted on principles of intelligence. But the needs of the time
and the interests of the events in the world already mentioned, have
repressed a real and earnest effort after Philosophy and driven hence
any general attention to it. It has thus happened that because vigorous
natures turned to the practical, insipidity and dulness appropriated
to themselves the preeminence in Philosophy and flourished there. It
may indeed be said that since Philosophy began to take a place in
Germany, it has never looked so badly as at the present time—never
have emptiness and shallowness overlaid it so completely, and never
have they spoken and acted with such arrogance, as though all power
were in their hands! To combat the shallowness, to strive with German
earnestness and honesty, to draw Philosophy out of the solitude into
which it has wandered—to do such work as this we may hope that we are
called by the higher spirit of our time. Let us together greet the dawn
of a better time in which the spirit, hitherto a prey to externalities,
may return within itself, come to itself again, and win space and
room for a kingdom of its own, where true minds will rise above the
interests of the moment, and obtain the power to receive the true,
eternal and divine, the power to consider and to grasp the highest.

We elders, who in the storms of the age have ripened into men, may
think you happy whose youth falls in the day in which you may devote
the same undisturbed to Science and to Truth. I have dedicated my life
to Science, and it is a true joy to me to find myself again in this
place where I may, in a higher measure and more extensive circle,
work with others in the interests of the higher sciences, and help to
direct your way therein. I hope that I may succeed in deserving and
obtaining your confidence. But in the first place, I can ask nothing of
you but to bring with you, above all, a trust in science and a trust
in yourselves. The love of truth, faith in the power of mind, is the
first condition in Philosophy. Man, because he is Mind, should and must
deem himself worthy of the highest; he cannot think too highly of the
greatness and the power of his mind, and, with this belief, nothing
will be so difficult and hard that it will not reveal itself to him.
The Being of the universe, at first hidden and concealed, has no power
which can offer resistance to the search for knowledge; it has to lay
itself open before the seeker—to set before his eyes and give for his
enjoyment, its riches and its depths.




PREFATORY NOTE


IN the History of Philosophy the observation is immediately forced
upon us that it certainly presents great interest if its subject is
regarded from a favourable point of view, but that it would still
possess interest even if its end were regarded as opposite to what it
is. Indeed, this interest may seem to increase in the degree in which
the ordinary conception of Philosophy, and of the end which its history
serves, is reversed; for from the History of Philosophy a proof of the
futility of the science is mainly derived.

The demand that a history, whatever the subject may be, should state
the facts without prejudice and without any particular object or end
to be gained by its means, must be regarded as a fair one. But with a
commonplace demand like this, we do not get far; for the history of a
subject is necessarily intimately connected with the conception which
is formed of it. In accordance with this what is important in it is
determined, and the relation of the events to the end regulates the
selection of facts to be recorded, the mode of comprehending them, and
the point of view under which they are regarded. It may happen from the
ideas formed of what a State really is, that a reader of the political
history of a country may find therein nothing of what he looks for.
Still more may this be the case in the history of Philosophy, and
representations of this history may be instanced in which everything,
excepting what was supposed to be Philosophy, appears to be found.

In other histories we have a clear conception of their subjects, at
least so far as their principal points are concerned; we know whether
they concern a particular land, people or race, or whether their
subject is the science of mathematics, physics, &c., or an art, such as
painting. The science of Philosophy has, however, this distinguishing
feature, and, if you will, this disadvantage as compared with other
sciences, that we find the most varied points of view as regards its
Notion, and regarding that which it ought to and can accomplish. If
this first assumption, the conception of the subject of the history, is
not established, the history itself is necessarily made vacillating,
and it only obtains consistency when it sets forth a definite
conception: but then in view of the various ways of regarding its
subject, it easily draws upon itself the reproach of one-sidedness.

That drawback relates, however, only to an external consideration of
this narrative; there is another and greater disadvantage allied to
it. If there are different Notions of the science of Philosophy, it
is the true Notion alone that puts us in a position to understand the
writings of philosophers who have worked in the knowledge of it. For in
thought, and particularly in speculative thought, comprehension means
something quite different from understanding the grammatical sense
of the words alone, and also from understanding them in the region
of ordinary conception only. Hence we may possess a knowledge of the
assertions, propositions, or of the opinions of philosophers; we may
have occupied ourselves largely with the grounds of and deductions from
these opinions, and the main point in all that we have done may be
wanting—the comprehension of the propositions. There is hence no lack
of voluminous and even learned histories of Philosophy in which the
knowledge of the matter itself about which so much ado has been made,
is absent. The authors of such histories may be compared to animals
which have listened to all the tones in some music, but to whose senses
the unison, the harmony of their tones, has not penetrated.

The circumstance mentioned makes it in no science so necessary as in
the history of Philosophy to commence with an Introduction, and in it
correctly to define, in the first place, the subject of the history
about to be related. For it may be said, How should we begin to treat
a subject, the name of which is certainly mentioned often enough, but
of whose nature we as yet know nothing? In treating the history of
Philosophy thus, we could have no other guidance than that of seeking
out and taking up whatever has received the name of Philosophy,
anywhere or any time. But in fact, when the Notion of Philosophy is
established, not arbitrarily but in a scientific way, such treatment
becomes the science of Philosophy itself. For in this science the
peculiar characteristic is that its Notion forms the beginning in
appearance merely, and it is only the whole treatment of the science
that is the proof, and indeed we may say the finding of its Notion; and
this is really a result of that treatment.

In this Introduction the Notion of the science of Philosophy, of the
subject of its history, has thus likewise to be set forth. At the same
time, though this Introduction professes to relate to the history of
Philosophy only, what has just been said of Philosophy on the whole,
also holds good. What can be said in this Introduction is not so much
something which may be stated beforehand, as what can be justified or
proved in the treatment of the history. These preparatory explanations
are for this reason only, not to be placed in the category of arbitrary
assumptions. But to begin with stating what in their justification are
really results, can only have the interest which may be possessed by a
summary, given in advance, of the most general contents of a science.
It must serve to set aside many questions and demands which might, from
our ordinary prejudices, arise in such a history.




INTRODUCTION


THERE are various aspects under which the History of Philosophy may
possess interest. We shall find the central point of this interest in
the essential connection existing between what is apparently past and
the present stage reached by Philosophy. That this connection is not
one of the external considerations which may be taken into account in
the history of Philosophy, but really expresses its inner character:
that the events of this history, while they perpetuate themselves in
their effects like all other events, yet produce their results in a
special way—this it is which is here to be more clearly expounded.

What the history of Philosophy shows us is a succession of noble minds,
a gallery of heroes of thought, who, by the power of Reason, have
penetrated into the being of things, of nature and of spirit, into
the Being of God, and have won for us by their labours the highest
treasure, the treasure of reasoned knowledge.

The events and actions of this history are therefore such that
personality and individual character do not enter to any large degree
into its content and matter. In this respect the history of Philosophy
contrasts with political history, in which the individual, according to
the peculiarity of his disposition, talents, affections, the strength
or weakness of his character, and in general, according to that through
which he is this individual, is the subject of actions and events. In
Philosophy, the less deserts and merits are accorded to the particular
individual, the better is the history; and the more it deals with
thought as free, with the universal character of man as man, the more
this thought, which is devoid of special characteristic, is itself
shown to be the producing subject.

The acts of thought appear at first to be a matter of history, and,
therefore, things of the past, and outside our real existence. But in
reality we are what we are through history: or, more accurately, as
in the history of Thought, what has passed away is only one side, so
in the present, what we have as a permanent possession is essentially
bound up with our place in history. The possession of self-conscious
reason, which belongs to us of the present world, did not arise
suddenly, nor did it grow only from the soil of the present. This
possession must be regarded as previously present, as an inheritance,
and as the result of labour—the labour of all past generations of men.
Just as the arts of outward life, the accumulated skill and invention,
the customs and arrangements of social and political life, are the
result of the thought, care, and needs, of the want and the misery, of
the ingenuity, the plans and achievements of those who preceded us in
history, so, likewise, in science, and specially in Philosophy, do we
owe what we are to the tradition which, as Herder has put it,[1] like
a holy chain, runs through all that was transient, and has therefore
passed away. Thus has been preserved and transmitted to us what
antiquity produced.

But this tradition is not only a stewardess who simply guards
faithfully that which she has received, and thus delivers it unchanged
to posterity, just as the course of nature in the infinite change and
activity of its forms ever remains constant to its original laws and
makes no step in advance. Such tradition is no motionless statue, but
is alive, and swells like a mighty river, which increases in size the
further it advances from its source. The content of this tradition is
that which the intellectual world has brought forth, and the universal
Mind does not remain stationary. But it is just the universal Mind
with which we have to do. It may certainly be the case with a single
nation that its culture, art, science—its intellectual activities as a
whole—are at a standstill. This appears, perhaps, to be the case with
the Chinese, for example, who may have been as far advanced in every
respect two thousand years ago as now. But the world-spirit does not
sink into this rest of indifference; this follows from its very nature,
for its activity is its life. This activity presupposes a material
already present, on which it acts, and which it does not merely augment
by the addition, of new matter, but completely fashions and transforms.
Thus that which each generation has produced in science and in
intellectual activity, is an heirloom to which all the past generations
have added their savings, a temple in which all races of men thankfully
and cheerfully deposit that which rendered aid to them through life,
and which they had won from the depths of Nature and of Mind. To
receive this inheritance is also to enter upon its use. It constitutes
the soul of each successive generation, the intellectual substance of
the time; its principles, prejudices, and possessions; and this legacy
is degraded to a material which becomes metamorphosed by Mind. In this
manner that which is received is changed, and the material worked upon
is both enriched and preserved at the same time.

This is the function of our own and of every age: to grasp the
knowledge which is already existing, to make it our own, and in so
doing to develop it still further and to raise it to a higher level. In
thus appropriating it to ourselves we make it into something different
from what it was before. On the presupposition of an already existing
intellectual world which is transformed in our appropriation of it,
depends the fact that Philosophy can only arise in connection with
previous Philosophy, from which of necessity it has arisen. The course
of history does not show us the Becoming of things foreign to us, but
the Becoming of ourselves and of our own knowledge.

The ideas and questions which may be present to our mind regarding the
character and ends of the history of Philosophy, depend on the nature
of the relationship here given. In this lies the explanation of the
fact that the study of the history of Philosophy is an introduction to
Philosophy itself. The guiding principles for the formation of this
history are given in this fact, the further discussion of which must
thus be the main object of this introduction. We must also, however,
keep in mind, as being of fundamental importance, the conception of
the aim of Philosophy. And since, as already mentioned, the systematic
exposition of this conception cannot here find a place, such discussion
as we can now undertake, can only propose to deal with the subject
provisionally and not to give a thorough and conclusive account of the
nature of the Becoming of Philosophy.

This Becoming is not merely a passive movement, as we suppose movements
such as those of the sun and moon to be. It is no mere movement in
the unresisting medium of space and time. What we must represent to
ourselves is the activity of free thought; we have to present the
history of the world of thought as it has arisen and produced itself.

There is an old tradition that it is the faculty of thought which
separates men from beasts; and to this tradition we shall adhere. In
accordance with this, what man has, as being nobler than a beast,
he has through thinking. Everything which is human, however it may
appear, is so only because the thought contained in it works and has
worked. But thought, although it is thus the essential, substantial,
and effectual, has many other elements. We must, however, consider it
best when Thought does not pursue anything else, but is occupied only
with itself—with what is noblest—when it has sought and found itself.
The history which we have before us is the history of Thought finding
itself, and it is the case with Thought that it only finds itself in
producing itself; indeed, that it only exists and is actual in finding
itself. These productions are the philosophic systems; and the series
of discoveries on which Thought sets out in order to discover itself,
forms a work which has lasted twenty-five hundred years.

If the Thought which is essentially Thought, is in and for itself
and eternal, and that which is true is contained in Thought alone,
how, then, does this intellectual world come to have a history? In
history what appears is transient, has disappeared in the night of
the past and is no more. But true, necessary thought—and it is only
with such that we have to do—is capable of no change. The question
here raised constitutes one of those matters first to be brought
under our consideration. But in the second place, there are also
many most important things outside of Philosophy, which are yet the
work of Thought, and which are left unconsidered. Such are Religion,
Political History, forms of Government, and the Arts and Sciences. The
question arises as to how these operations differ from the subject of
consideration, and how they are related in history? As regards these
two points of view, it is desirable to show in what sense the history
of Philosophy is here taken, in order to see clearly what we are about.
Moreover, in the third place, we must first take a general survey
before we descend to particulars, else the whole is not seen for the
mere details—the wood is not seen for the trees, nor Philosophy for
mere philosophies. We require to have a general idea of the nature and
aim of the whole in order to know what to look for. Just as we first
desire to obtain a general idea of a country, which we should no longer
see in going into detail, so we desire to see the relation which single
philosophies bear to the whole; for in reality, the high value of the
detail lies in its relation to the whole. This is nowhere more the
case than with Philosophy, and also with its history. In the case of a
history, indeed, the establishment of the Universal seems to be less
needful than in that of one of the sciences proper. For history seems
at first to be a succession of chance events, in which each fact stands
isolated by itself, which has Time alone as a connecting-link. But even
in political history we are not satisfied with this. We see, or at
least divine in it, that essential connection in which the individual
events have their place and relation to an end or aim, and in this
way obtain significance. For the significant in history is such only
through its relation to and connection with a Universal. To perceive
this Universal is thus to apprehend the significance.

There are, therefore, the following points with which I wish to deal in
this introduction.


