PREFACE: ON SCIENTIFIC
COGNITION
I. It is custo~ary to preface a work With an explanation of
the author~s aim, why he wrote the book, and the relationship
in which he believes it to stand to other earlier or contemporary
treatises on the same subject. In the case of a philosophical
work, however, such an explanation seems not only superfluous
but, in view of the nature of the subject-matter, even inappropriate and misleading. For whatever might appropriately be
said about philosophy in a preface-say a historical statement
ofthe main drift and the point ofview, the general content and
results, a string of random assertions and assurances about
truth-none of this can be accepted as the way in which to
expound philosophical truth. Also, since philosophy moves
essentially in the element ofuniversality, which includes within
itself the particular, it might seem that here more than in any
of the other sciences the subject-matter itself, and even in its
complete nature, wereexpressed in the aim and the final results,
the executionbeing by contrast really the unessential factor. On
the other hand, in the ordinary view of anatomy, for instance
(say, the knowledge of the parts of the body regarded as inanimate), we are quite sure thatwe do not as yet possess the subject-matter itself, the content of this science, but must in addition exert ourselves to know the particulars. Further, in the case
ofsuch an aggregate ofinformation, which has no right to bear
the name ofScience, an opening talk about aim and other such
generalities is usually conducted in the same historical and uncomprehending way in which the content itself (these nerves,
muscles, etc.) is spoken of. In the case of philosophy, on the
other hand, this would give rise to the incongruity that along
with the employment of such a method its inability to grasp
the truth would also be demonstrated.
2. Furthermore, the very attempt to define how a philosophical work is supposed to be connected with other efforts
to deal with the same subject-matter drags in an extraneous
concern, and what is really important for the cognition of the2 
truth is obscured. The more conventional opinion gets fixated
on the antithesis of truth and falsity, the more it tends to expect
a given philosophical system to be either accepted or contradicted; and hence it finds only acceptance or rejection. It
does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as
the progressive unfolding of truth, but rather sees in it simple
disagreements. The bud disappears in the bursting-forth of the
blossom, and one might say that the former is refuted by the
latter; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is shown
up in its turn as a false manifestation of the plant, and the fruit
now emerges as the truth ofit instead. These forms are not just
distinguished from one another, they also supplant one another
as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid
nature makes them moments of an organic unity in which they
not only do not conflict, but in which each is as necessary as
the other; and this mutual necessity alone constitut~s the life
of the whqle. But he who rejects a philosophical systerp. [Le.
the new ppilosopherJdoes not usually comprehend what he is
doing in this way; and he whograspsJhe contradiction between
them [i.e. the historian ofphilosophy] does not, as a general
rule, Jcnow how to free itfroIP- itsone",sidedness, or maintain
it in its freeqom by recognizing the reciprocally necessary
motpents that take shape as a cOl1fiictand seeming incompatibility.
3. Demanding and SJl,pplyir,tg these [superficial] explanatiops passes readily enQugh as a concern with what is essential.
Where could the inner meaning of a philosophical work find
fuller expression than in its airps and results,anq how could
these be more exactly known than by distinguishing them from
everything else the age brings forth in this sphere? Yet when
trtisactivity is taken for more than the mere beginnings of cognition) when it is allowed to pass for actual cognition, then it
shOHld be reckoned as no more than a device for evading the
real issue [die Sache selhstJ, a way of creating an impression of
hard work and serious commitment to the problem, whileactually sparing oneself both. For the real issue is not exhausted
by stating it as an aim, but by carrying it out, nor is the result
the actual whole, but rather the result together with the process
through which it came about. The aim by itselfis a lifeless universal, just as the guiding tendency is a mere drive that as yetPREFACE 3
lacks an actual existence; and the bare result is the corpse which
has left the guiding tendency behind it. Similarly, the specific
difference of a thing is rather its limit; it is where the thing
stops, or it is what the thing is not. This concern with aim or
results, with differentiating and passing judgement on various
thinkers is therefore an easier task than it might seem. For instead of getting involved in the real issue, this kind of activity
is always away beyond it; instead of tarrying with it, and losing
itselfin it, this kind ofknowing is forever grasping at something
new; it remains essentially preoccupied with itself instead of
being preoccupied with the real issue and surrendering to it.
To judge a thing that has substance and solid worth is quite
easy, to comprehend itis much harder, and to blend judgement
and comprehension in a definitive description is the hardest
thing of all.
4. Culture and its laborious emergence from the immediacy
ofsubstantial life must always begin by getting acquainted with
general principles and points of view, so as at first to work up
to a general conception [Gedanke] of the real issue, as well as learning to support and refute the general conception with reasons;
then to apprehend the rich and concrete abundance [of life]
by differential classification; and finally to give accurate instruction and pass serious judgement upon it. From its very beginning, culture must leave room for ,the earnestness of life in
its concrete richness; this leads the way to an experience of the
real issue. And even when the real issue has been penetrated
to its depths by serious speculative effort, this kind of knowing
and judging will still retain its appropriate place in ordinary
conversation.
5. The true shape in which truth exists can only be thescientific system of such truth. To help bring philosophy closer to
the form of Science, to the goal where it can lay aside the title
'love of knowing' and be actual knowing-that is what I have
set myself to do. The inner necessity that knowing ,should be
Science lies in its nature, and only the systematic exposition
of philosophy itself provides it. But the external necessity, so far
as ids grasped in a general way, setting aside accidental matters
of person and motivation, is the same as the inner, or in other
words it lies in the shape in which time sets forth the sequential
existence ofits moments. To show that now is the time for philo-4 
sophy to be raised to the status of a Science would therefore
be the only true justification of any effort that has this aim,
for to do so would demonstrate the necessity of the aim, would
indeed at the same time be the accomplishing of it.
6. To lay down that the true shape of truth is scientificor, what is the same thing, to maintain that truth has only the
Notion as the element of its existence~seems, I know, to con~
tradict a view which is in our time as prevalent as it is preten~
tious, and to go against what that view implies. Some explana~
don therefore seems called for, even though it mllst for the
present be no more than a bare assertion, like the view that
it contradicts. If, namely, the True exists only in what, or better
as what, is sometimes called intuition, sometimes immediate
knowledge of the Absolute, religion or being-not at the centre
ofdivine love but the being of the divine love itself-then what
is required in the exposition of philosophy is, from this viewpoint, rather the opposite of the form of the Notion. For the
Absolute is not supposed to be comprehended, it is to be felt
and intuited; not the Notion of the Absolute, but the feeling
and intuition of it, must govern what is said, and must be
expressed by it.
7. Ifwe apprehend a demand of this kind in its broader context, and view it as it appears at the stage which selfaconseious
Spirit has presently reached, it is clear that Spirit has now got
beyond the substantial life it formerly led in the element of
thought, that it is beyond the immediacy of faith, beyond t1)e
satisfaction and security ofthe certainty that consciousness then
had, of its reconciliation with the essential being, and of that
being's universal presence both within and without. It has not
only gone beyond all this into the other extreme ofan insubstan·
tial reflection ofitselfinto itself, but beyond that too. Spirit has
not oply lost its essential life; it is also conscious of this loss,
and of the finitude that is its own content. Turning away from
the empty husks, and confessing that it lies in wickedness, it
reviles itself for so doing, and now demands from philosophy,
not so much knowledge of what it is, as the recovery through
its agency ofthat lost sense ofsolid .and substantial being. Philosophy is to meet tbis need, not by opening up the fast-locked
nature .of substance, and raising this to self-consciousness, not
by bringing consciousness out ofits chaos back to an order basedPREFACE 5
on thought, nor to the simplicity of the Notion, but rather by
running together what thought has put asunder, by suppressing
the differentiations of the Notion and restoring the feeling of
essential being: in short, by providing edification rather than
insight. The 'beautiful', the ~holy', the 'eternal', 'religion', and
'love' are the bait required to arouse the desire to bite; not the
Notion, but ecstasy, not the cold march of necessity in the
thing itself, but the ferment of enthusiasm, these are supposed
to be what sustains and continually extends the wealth ofsub~
stance.
B. In keeping with this demand is the strenuous, almost
over~zealous and frenzied effort to tear men away from their
preoccupation with the sensuous, from their ordinary, private
[einzelne] affairs, and to direct their gaze to the stars; as if they
had forgotten all about the divine, and were ready like worms
to content themselves with dirt and water. Formerly they had
a heaven adorned with a vast wealth of thoughts and imagery.
The meaningofall that is, hung on the thread oflight by which
it was linked to that heaven. Instead ofdwelling in this world's
presence, men looked beyond it, following this thread to an
other~worldly presence, so to speak. The eye of the Spirit had
to be forcibly turned and held fast to the things of this world;
and it has taken a long time before the lucidity which on\y
heavenly things used to have could penetrate the dullness and
confusion in which the sense of worldly things was enveloped,
anclso make attention to the here and now as such"attention
to what has been called 'experience', an interesting and valid
enterprise. Now we seem to need just the opposite: sense is so
fast rooted in earthly things that it requires just as much force
to raise it. The Spirit shows itself as so impoverished that, like
a wanderer in the deserLcraving for a mere mouthful of water,
it seems to crave for its refreshment only the bare feeling of the
divine in general. By the little which now :satisfies Spirit, we
can measure the extent of its loss.
g. This modest complacency in receiving, or thissparingness
in giving, does not, however, befit Science. Whoever seeks mere
edification, and whoever wants to shroud in a misttbe manifold
variety of his earthly existence and of thought, in order to
pursue the indeterminate enjoyment of this indeterminate
divinity, may look where he likes to find all this. He will find6 
ample opportunity to dream up something for himself. But
philosophy must beware of the wish to be edifying.
10. Still less must this complacency which abjures Science
claim that such rapturous haziness is superior to Science. This
prophetic talk supposes that it is staying right in the centre and
in the depths, looks disdainfully at determinateness (Horos) ,
and deliberately holds alooffrom Notion and Necessity as products of that reflection which is at home only in the finite. But
just as there is an empty breadth, so too there is an empty depth;
and just as there is an extension of substance that pours forth
as a finite multiplicity without the force to hold the multiplicity
together, so there is an intensity without content, one that holds
itself in as a sheer force without spread, and this is in no way
distinguishable from superficiality. The power of Spirit is only
as great as its expression, its depth only as deep as it dares to
spread out and lose itselfin its exposition. Moreover, when this
non-conceptual, substantial knowledge professes to have sunk
the idiosyncrasy of the self in essential being, and to philosophize in a true and holy manner, it hides the truth from itself:
by spurning measure and definition, instead of being devoted
to God, it merely gives free rein both to the contingency of the
content within it, and to its own caprice. Such minds, when
they give themselves up to the uncontrolled ferment of (the
divine] substance, imagine that, by drawing a veil over selfconsciousness and surrendering understanding they become the
beloved of God to whom He gives wisdom in sleep; and hence
what they in fact receive, and bring to birth in their sleep) is
nothing but dreams.
I I. Besides, it is not difficult to see that ours is a birth-time
and a period of transition to a new era. Spirit has broken with
the world it has hitherto inhabited and imagined, and is of a
mind to submerge it in the past, and in the labour of its own
transformation. Spirit is indeed never at rest but always
engaged in moving forward. But just as the first breath drawn
by a child after its long, quiet nourishment breaks the gradualness of merely quantitative growth-there is a qualitative leap,
and the child is born-so likewise the Spirit in its formation
matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving bit
by bit the structure ofits previous world, whose tottering state
is only hinted at by isolated symptoms. The frivolity and bore..PREFACE
dom which unsettle the established order, the vague foreboding
of something unknown, these are the heralds of approaching
change. The gradual crumbling that left unaltered the face of
the whole is cut short by a sunburst which, in one flash, illuminates the features of the new world.
12. But this new world is no more a complete actuality than
is a new-born child; it is essential to bear this in mind. It comes
on the scene for the first time in its immediacy or its Notion.
Just as little as a building is finished when its foundation has
been laid, soIittle is the achieved Notion ofthe whole the whole
itself. When we wish to see an oak with its massive trunk and
spreading branches and foliage, we are not content to be shown
an acorn instead. So too, Science, the crown ora world of Spirit,
is not complete in its beginnings. The onset of the new spirit
is the product of a widespread upheaval in various forms of
culture, the prize at the end oLa complicated, tortuous path
and ofjust as variegated and strenuous an effort. l1'i8 the whole
which, having traversed its content in time and space, has
returned into itself, and is the resultant-simple Notion of the
whole. But the actuality of this simple whole consists in those
various shapes and forms which have become its moments, and
which wiUnow d evelopand take shape afresh, this time in their
new element, in their newly acquired meaning:
13. WhiletheinitiaLappearanceofthe new world is, to begin
with, only the whole veiled in its simplicity, or the general
founclationof the whole,the wealth of previous existence is still
presentto consciousnessin memory. Consciousness misses in the
newly emerging shape its former range and specificity of content, and even more the articulation of form whereby distinctions are securely defined, and stand arrayed in their fixed
relations. Withoutsucharticulation, Science lacks universal intelligibility, and gives the appearance of being the esoteric possession of a few individuals: an esoteric possession,since it is
as yet present only in its Notion or in its inwardness; of a few
individuals, since its undiffused manifestation makes its existence something singular. Only what is completely determined
is at once exoteric, comprehensible, and capable of being
learned and appropriated byatl. The intelligible form of
Science is the way open and equally accessible to everyone, and
consciousness as it approaches Science justly demands that it8 
be able to attain to rational knowledge by way of the ordinary
understanding; fot the understanding is thought, the pure'!'
as such; and what is intel1igible is what is already familiar and
common to Science and the unscientific cDnsciousness alike, the
latter through its having afforded direct access to the former.
1.4. Science in its early stages, when it has attained neither
to completeness of detail nor perfection .of form, is vulnerable
to criticism. But it would be as unjust for such criticism to strike
at the very heart ofScience, as it is untenable tD refuse to honour
the demand for its further development. This polarization
seems t.o be the GDrdian knot with which scientific culture is
at present struggling, and which it still does not properly understand. One side boasts .of its wealth of material and intelligibility, the other side at least scorns this intelligibility, and
flaunts its immediate rationality and divinity. Even if the
former side is reduced to silen<;:e, whether by the force of truth
alone or by the blustering .of the other, and even i~ in respect
of fundam.entals, it feeJs itself outmatched, it is by no means
satisfied regarding the saiddemands ; for they are justified, but
not fulfilled. Its silence stems .only halffrom the triumph of its
opponef.lt, and halffrom the boredom and indifference which
tend to result from the continual awakening of expectations
through unfulfilled promises..
