
                        Hegel's Philosophy of Mind

                                    By

                      Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

                             T



PREFACE.


I here offer a translation of the third or last part of Hegel's
encyclopaedic sketch of philosophy,--the _Philosophy of Mind_. The volume,
like its subject, stands complete in itself. But it may also be regarded
as a supplement or continuation of the work begun in my version of his
_Logic_. I have not ventured upon the _Philosophy of Nature_ which lies
between these two. That is a province, to penetrate into which would
require an equipment of learning I make no claim to,--a province, also, of
which the present-day interest would be largely historical, or at least
bound up with historical circumstances.

The translation is made from the German text given in the Second Part of
the Seventh Volume of Hegel's Collected Works, occasionally corrected by
comparison with that found in the second and third editions (of 1827 and
1830) published by the author. I have reproduced only Hegel's own
paragraphs, and entirely omitted the _Zusätze_ of the editors. These
addenda--which are in origin lecture-notes--to the paragraphs are, in the
text of the Collected Works, given for the first section only. The
psychological part which they accompany has been barely treated elsewhere
by Hegel: but a good popular exposition of it will be found in Erdmann's
_Psychologische Briefe_. The second section was dealt with at greater
length by Hegel himself in his _Philosophy of Law_ (1820). The topics of
the third section are largely covered by his lectures on Art, Religion,
and History of Philosophy.

I do not conceal from myself that the text offers a hard nut to crack. Yet
here and there, even through the medium of the translation, I think some
light cannot fail to come to an earnest student. Occasionally, too, as,
for instance, in §§ 406, 459, 549, and still more in §§ 552, 573, at the
close of which might stand the words _Liberavi animam meam_, the writer
really "lets himself go," and gives his mind freely on questions where
speculation comes closely in touch with life.

In the _Five Introductory Essays_ I have tried sometimes to put together,
and sometimes to provide with collateral elucidation, some points in the
Mental Philosophy. I shall not attempt to justify the selection of
subjects for special treatment further than to hope that they form a more
or less connected group, and to refer for a study of some general
questions of system and method to my _Prolegomena to the Study of Hegel's
Philosophy_ which appear almost simultaneously with this volume.

OXFORD,
_December, 1893_.





FIVE INTRODUCTORY ESSAYS IN PSYCHOLOGY AND ETHICS.




Essay I. On The Scope Of A Philosophy Of Mind.


The art of finding titles, and of striking out headings which catch the
eye or ear, and lead the mind by easy paths of association to the subject
under exposition, was not one of Hegel's gifts. A stirring phrase, a vivid
or picturesque turn of words, he often has. But his lists of contents,
when they cease to be commonplace, are apt to run into the bizarre and the
grotesque. Generally, indeed, his rubrics are the old and (as we may be
tempted to call them) insignificant terms of the text-books. But, in
Hegel's use of them, these conventional designations are charged with a
highly individualised meaning. They may mean more--they may mean less--than
they habitually pass for: but they unquestionably specify their meaning
with a unique and almost personal flavour. And this can hardly fail to
create and to disappoint undue expectations.



(i.) Philosophy and its Parts.


Even the main divisions of his system show this conservatism in
terminology. The names of the three parts of the Encyclopaedia are, we may
say, non-significant of their peculiar contents. And that for a good
reason. What Hegel proposes to give is no novel or special doctrine, but
the universal philosophy which has passed on from age to age, here
narrowed and there widened, but still essentially the same. It is
conscious of its continuity and proud of its identity with the teachings
of Plato and Aristotle.

The earliest attempts of the Greek philosophers to present philosophy in a
complete and articulated order--attempts generally attributed to the
Stoics, the schoolmen of antiquity--made it a tripartite whole. These three
parts were Logic, Physics, and Ethics. In their entirety they were meant
to form a cycle of unified knowledge, satisfying the needs of theory as
well as practice. As time went on, however, the situation changed: and if
the old names remained, their scope and value suffered many changes. New
interests and curiosities, due to altered circumstances, brought other
departments of reality under the focus of investigation besides those
which had been primarily discussed under the old names. Inquiries became
more specialised, and each tended to segregate itself from the rest as an
independent field of science. The result was that in modern times the
territory still marked by the ancient titles had shrunk to a mere phantom
of its former bulk. Almost indeed things had come to such a pass that the
time-honoured figures had sunk into the misery of _rois fainéants_; while
the real business of knowledge was discharged by the younger and less
conventional lines of research which the needs and fashions of the time
had called up. Thus Logic, in the narrow formal sense, was turned into an
"art" of argumentation and a system of technical rules for the analysis
and synthesis of academical discussion. Physics or Natural Philosophy
restricted itself to the elaboration of some metaphysical postulates or
hypotheses regarding the general modes of physical operation. And Ethics
came to be a very unpractical discussion of subtleties regarding moral
faculty and moral standard. Meanwhile a theory of scientific method and of
the laws governing the growth of intelligence and formation of ideas grew
up, and left the older logic to perish of formality and inanition. The
successive departments of physical science, each in turn asserting its
independence, finally left Natural Philosophy no alternative between
clinging to its outworn hypotheses and abstract generalities, or
identifying itself (as Newton in his great book put it) with the
_Principia Mathematica_ of the physical sciences. Ethics, in its turn, saw
itself, on one hand, replaced by psychological inquiries into the
relations between the feelings and the will and the intelligence; while,
on the other hand, a host of social, historical, economical, and other
researches cut it off from the real facts of human life, and left it no
more than the endless debates on the logical and metaphysical issues
involved in free-will and conscience, duty and merit.

It has sometimes been said that Kant settled this controversy between the
old departments of philosophy and the new branches of science. And the
settlement, it is implied, consisted in assigning to the philosopher a
sort of police and patrol duty in the commonwealth of science. He was to
see that boundaries were duly respected, and that each science kept
strictly to its own business. For this purpose each branch of philosophy
was bound to convert itself into a department of criticism--an examination
of first principles in the several provinces of reality or experience--with
a view to get a distinct conception of what they were, and thus define
exactly the lines on which the structures of more detailed science could
be put up solidly and safely. This plan offered tempting lines to
research, and sounded well. But on further reflection there emerge one or
two difficulties, hard to get over. Paradoxical though it may seem, one
cannot rightly estimate the capacity and range of foundations, before one
has had some familiarity with the buildings erected upon them. Thus you
are involved in a circle: a circle which is probably inevitable, but which
for that reason it is well to recognise at once. Then--what is only another
way of saying the same thing--it is impossible to draw an inflexible line
between premises of principle and conclusions of detail. There is no spot
at which criticism can stop, and, having done its business well, hand on
the remaining task to dogmatic system. It was an instinctive feeling of
this implication of system in what professed only to be criticism which
led the aged Kant to ignore his own previous professions that he offered
as yet no system, and when Fichte maintained himself to be erecting the
fabric for which Kant had prepared the ground, to reply by the
counter-declaration that the criticism was the system--that "the curtain
was the picture."

The Hegelian philosophy is an attempt to combine criticism with system,
and thus realise what Kant had at least foretold. It is a system which is
self-critical, and systematic only through the absoluteness of its
criticism. In Hegel's own phrase, it is an immanent and an incessant
dialectic, which from first to last allows finality to no dogmatic rest,
but carries out Kant's description of an Age of Criticism, in which
nothing, however majestic and sacred its authority, can plead for
exception from the all-testing _Elenchus_. Then, on the other hand, Hegel
refuses to restrict philosophy and its branches to anything short of the
totality. He takes in its full sense that often-used phrase--the Unity of
Knowledge. Logic becomes the all-embracing research of "first
principles,"--the principles which regulate physics and ethics. The old
divisions between logic and metaphysic, between induction and deduction,
between theory of reasoning and theory of knowledge,--divisions which those
who most employed them were never able to show the reason and purpose
of--because indeed they had grown up at various times and by "natural
selection" through a vast mass of incidents: these are superseded and
merged in one continuous theory of real knowledge considered under its
abstract or formal aspect,--of organised and known reality in its
underlying thought-system. But these first principles were only an
abstraction from complete reality--the reality which nature has when
unified by mind--and they presuppose the total from which they are derived.
The realm of pure thought is only the ghost of the Idea--of the unity and
reality of knowledge, and it must be reindued with its flesh and blood.
The logical world is (in Kantian phrase) only the _possibility_ of Nature
and Mind. It comes first--because it is a system of First Principles: but
these first principles could only be elicited by a philosophy which has
realised the meaning of a mental experience, gathered by interpreting the
facts of Nature.

Natural Philosophy is no longer--according to Hegel's view of it--merely a
scheme of mathematical ground-work. That may be its first step. But its
scope is a complete unity (which is not a mere aggregate) of the branches
of natural knowledge, exploring both the inorganic and the organic world.
In dealing with this endless problem, philosophy seems to be baulked by an
impregnable obstacle to its progress. Every day the advance of
specialisation renders any comprehensive or synoptic view of the totality
of science more and more impossible. No doubt we talk readily enough of
Science. But here, if anywhere, we may say there is no Science, but only
sciences. The generality of science is a proud fiction or a gorgeous
dream, variously told and interpreted according to the varying interest
and proclivity of the scientist. The sciences, or those who specially
expound them, know of no unity, no philosophy of science. They are content
to remark that in these days the thing is impossible, and to pick out the
faults in any attempts in that direction that are made outside their pale.
Unfortunately for this contention, the thing is done by us all, and,
indeed, has to be done. If not as men of science, yet as men--as human
beings--we have to put together things and form some total estimate of the
drift of development, of the unity of nature. To get a notion, not merely
of the general methods and principles of the sciences, but of their
results and teachings, and to get this not as a mere lot of fragments, but
with a systematic unity, is indispensable in some degree for all rational
life. The life not founded on science is not the life of man. But he will
not find what he wants in the text-books of the specialist, who is obliged
to treat his subject, as Plato says, "under the pressure of necessity,"
and who dare not look on it in its quality "to draw the soul towards
truth, and to form the philosophic intellect so as to uplift what we now
unduly keep down(1)." If the philosopher in this province does his work
but badly, he may plead the novelty of the task to which he comes as a
pioneer or even an architect. He finds little that he can directly
utilise. The materials have been gathered and prepared for very special
aims; and the great aim of science--that human life may be made a higher,
an ampler, and happier thing,--has hardly been kept in view at all, except
in its more materialistic aspects. To the philosopher the supreme interest
of the physical sciences is that man also belongs to the physical
universe, or that Mind and Matter as we know them are (in Mr. Spencer's
language) "at once antithetical and inseparable." He wants to find the
place of Man,--but of Man as Mind--in Nature.

If the scope of Natural Philosophy be thus expanded to make it the unity
and more than the synthetic aggregate of the several physical sciences--to
make it the whole which surpasses the addition of all their fragments, the
purpose of Ethics has not less to be deepened and widened. Ethics, under
that title, Hegel knows not. And for those who cannot recognise anything
unless it be clearly labelled, it comes natural to record their censure of
Hegelianism for ignoring or disparaging ethical studies. But if we take
the word in that wide sense which common usage rather justifies than
adopts, we may say that the whole philosophy of Mind is a moral
philosophy. Its subject is the moral as opposed to the physical aspect of
reality: the inner and ideal life as opposed to the merely external and
real materials of it: the world of intelligence and of humanity. It
displays Man in the several stages of that process by which he expresses
the full meaning of nature, or discharges the burden of that task which is
implicit in him from the first. It traces the steps of that growth by
which what was no better than a fragment of nature--an intelligence located
(as it seemed) in one piece of matter--comes to realise the truth of it and
of himself. That truth is his ideal and his obligation: but it is
also--such is the mystery of his birthright--his idea and possession.
He--like the natural universe--is (as the _Logic_ has shown) a principle of
unification, organisation, idealisation: and his history (in its ideal
completeness) is the history of the process by which he, the typical man,
works the fragments of reality (and such mere reality must be always a
collection of fragments) into the perfect unity of a many-sided character.
Thus the philosophy of mind, beginning with man as a sentient organism,
the focus in which the universe gets its first dim confused expression
through mere feeling, shows how he "erects himself above himself" and
realises what ancient thinkers called his kindred with the divine.
