Preliminary Concepts
 192.
Nature has presented itself as the idea in the form of otherness.
Since in nature the idea is as the negative of itself or is external to itself nature is not merely external in
relation to this idea, but the externality constitutes the determination in which nature as nature exists.
 193.
In this externality the determinations of the concept have the appearance of an indifferent subsistence and
isolation in regards to each other. The concept therefore exists as an inward entity. Hence nature exhibits no
freedom in its existence, but only necessity and contingency.
For this reason nature, in the determinate existence, which makes it nature, is not to be deified, nor are the
sun, moon, animals, plants, and so on, to be regarded and adduced as the works of God, more excellent than
human actions and events. Nature in itself in the idea, is divine, but in the specific mode by which it is nature
it is suspended. As it is, the being of nature does not correspond to its concept; its existing actuality therefore
has no truth; its abstract essence is the negative, as the ancients conceived of matter in general as the
non-ens. But because, even in this element, nature is a representation of the idea, one may very well admire
in it the wisdom of God. If however, as Vanini said, a stalk of straw suffices to demonstrate God's being, then
every representation of the spirit, the slightest fancy of the mind, the play of its most capricious whim, every
word, offers a ground for the knowledge of God's being that is superior to any single object of nature. In
nature, not only is the play of forms unbound and unchecked in contingency, but each figure for itself lacks
the concept of itself. The highest level to which nature drives its existence is life, but as only a natural idea
this is at the mercy of the unreason of externality, and individual vitality is in each moment of its existence
entangled with an individuality which is other to it, whereas in every expression of the spirit is contained the
moment of free, universal self-relation. - Nature in general is justly determined as the decline of the idea
from itself because in the element of externality it has the determination of the inappropriateness of itself with
itself.-A similar misunderstanding is to regard human works of art as inferior to natural things, on the
grounds that works of art must take their material from outside, and that they are not alive.-It is as if the
spiritual form did not contain a higher level of life, and were not more worthy of the spirit than the natural
form, and as if in all ethical things what can be called matter did not belong solely to the spirit -
 1Nature remains, despite all the contingency of its existence, obedient to eternal laws; but surely this is also
true of the realm of selfconsciousness, a fact which can already be seen in the belief that providence governs
human affairs. Or are the determinations of this providence in the field of human affairs only contingent and
irrational? But if the contingency of spirit, the free will, leads to evil, is this not still infinitely higher than the
regular behaviour of the stars, or the innocence of the plants?
 194.
Nature is to be viewed as a system of stages, in which one stage necessarily arises from the other and is the
truth closest to the other from which it results, though not in such a way that the one would naturally generate
the other, but rather in the inner idea which constitutes the ground of nature.
It has been an awkward conception in older and also more recent philosophy of nature to see the progression
and the transition of one natural form and sphere into another as an external, actual production which,
however, in order to be made clearer, is relegated to the darkness of the past. Precisely this externality is
characteristic of nature: differences are allowed to fall apart and to appear as existences indifferent to each
other; and the dialectical concept, which leads the stages further, is the interior which emerges only in the
spirit. Certainly the previously favoured teleological view provided the basis for the relation to the concept,
and, in the same way, the relation to the spirit, but it focused only on external purposiveness-(cf  151) and
viewed the spirit as if it were entangled in finite and natural purposes. Due to the vapidity of such finite
purposes, purposes for which natural things were shown to be useful, the teleological view has been
discredited for exhibiting the wisdom of God. The view of the usefulness of natural things has the implicit
truth that these things are not in and for themselves an absolute goal; nevertheless, it is unable to determine
whether such things are defective or inadequate. For this determination it is necessary to posit that the
immanent moment of its idea, which brings about its transiency and transition into another existence,
produces at the same time a transformation into a higher concept.
 195.
Nature is, in itself a living whole. The movement of its idea through its sequence of stages is more precisely
this: the idea posits itself as that which it is in itself; or, what is the same thing, it goes into itself out of that
immediacy and externality which is death in order to go into itself; yet further, it suspends this determinacy
of the idea, in which it is only life, and becomes spirit, which is its truth.
 196.
The idea as nature is: (1) as universal, ideal being outside of itself space and time; (2) as real and mutual
being apart from itself particular or material existence, - inorganic nature; (3) as living actuality, organic
nature. The three sciences can thus be named mathematics, physics, and physiology.

 197.
(1) The first or immediate determination of nature is the abstract generality of its self-externality,-its
unmediated indifference, space. It is the wholly ideal juxtaposition, because it is being outside of itself and
absolutely continuous, because this being apart from itself is still entirely abstract, and has no specific
difference within itself.
Much has been said, from different theoretical positions, about the nature of space. I will mention only the

 2Kantian determination that space is, like time, a form of sensory intuition. It has also become customary to
establish fundamentally that space must be regarded only as something subjective in representation.
Disregarding what, in the Kantian conception, belongs to subjective idealism and its determinations (cf  5),
the correct determination remains that space is a mere form, i.e., an abstraction, that of immediate externality.
- To speak of points of space, as if they constituted the positive element of space, is inadmissible, since
space, on account of its lack of differentiation, is only the possibility and not the positing of that which is
negative and therefore absolutely continuous. The point is therefore rather the negation of space.-This also
settles the question of the infinitude of space. Space is in general pure quantity ( 53f), though no longer as a
logical determination, but rather as existing immediately and externally. Nature, consequently, does not begin
with quality but with quantity, because its determination is not, like logical being, the absolute first and
immediate, but essentially a mediated being, a being external to and other than itself
 198.
Space has, as the concept in general (and more determinate than an indifferent self-externality) its
differences within it: (a) in its indifference these are immediately the three dimensions, which are merely
diverse and quite indeterminate.
But geometry is not required to deduce that space necessarily has precisely three dimensions, for it is not a
philosophical science, and may therefore presuppose space as its object. Moreover, even apart from this, no
thought is given to the demonstration of such a necessity. The necessity rests on the nature of the concept,
whose determinations, however, because they depict themselves in these first elements of being apart from
themselves, in abstract quantity, are only entirely superficial and a completely empty difference. One can
also, therefore, not say how height, length, and width differ from each other, because they only ought to be
different, but are not yet differences.-Height has its more precise determination as direction according to the
center of the earth, but this does not at all concern the nature of space for itself Following from this point it is
equally as indifferent whether this direction is called height or depth, or length or breadth, which is also often
called depth.
 199.
(b) But the difference of space is essentially a determinate, qualitative difference. As such it is (a) first, the
negation of space itself because this is immediate and undifferentiated self-externality, the point. (b) The
negation as negation, however, is itself spatial, and the relation of the point to space is the line, the first
otherness of the point. (c) The truth of the otherness is, however, the negation of the negation. The line,
therefore, passes over into the plane, which on the one hand is a determinacy opposed to line and point, and
thus is plane in general, but on the other hand is the suspended negation of space, and thus the
re-establishment of spatial totality, which, however, now contains the negative moment within itself an
enclosing surface, which splits off an individual, whole space.
That the line does not consist of points, nor the plane of lines, follows from their concepts, for the line is the
point existing outside of itself relating itself to space, and suspending itself and the plane is just as much the
suspended line existing outside of itself.-Here the point is represented as the first and positive entity, and
taken as the starting point. The converse, though, is also true: in as far as space is positive, the plane is the
first negation and the line is the second, which, however, is in its truth the negation relating self to self the
point. The necessity of the transition is the same.-
The other configurations of space considered by geometry are further qualitative limitations of a spatial
abstraction, of the plane, or of a limited spatial whole. Here there occur a few necessary moments, for
example, that the triangle is the first rectilinear figure, that all other figures must, to be determined, be
reduced to it or to the square, and so on.-The principle of these figures is the identity of the understanding,

 3which determines the figurations as regular, and in this way grounds the relationships and sets them in place,
which it now becomes the purpose of science to know.
It may be noted in passing that it was an extraordinary notion of Kant's to claim that the definition of the
straight line as the shortest distance between two points is a synthetic proposition, for my concept of
straightness contains nothing of size, but only a quality. In this sense every definition is a synthetic
proposition. What is defined, the straight line, is in the first place the intuition or representation, and the
determination that it is the shortest distance between two points constitutes in the first place the concept
(namely, as it appears in such definitions, cf.  110). That the concept is not already given by the intuition
constitutes precisely the difference between the two, and is what calls for a definition. That something seems
to the representation to be a quality, though its specificity rests on a quantitative determination, is something
very simple, and also the case for example with the right angle, the straight line, and so on.
 200.
(2) Negativity, which as point relates itself to space and in space develops its determinations as line and
plane, is, however, in the sphere of self-externality equally for itself and appearing indifferent to the
motionless coexistence of space. Negativity, thus posited for itself is time.
 201.
Time, as the negative unity of being outside of itself, is just as thoroughly abstract, ideal being: being which,
since it is, is not, and since it is not, is.
Tune, like space, is a pure form of sensuousness, or intuition; but, as with space, the difference between
objectivity and a contrastingly subjective consciousness does not matter to time. If these determinations are
applied to space and time, then space is abstract objectivity, whereas time is abstract subjectivity. Time is the
same principle as the I = I of pure self-consciousness; but the same principle or the simple concept still in its
entire externality, intuited mere becoming, pure being in itself as sheer coming out of itself. Time is just as
continuous as space, for it is abstract negativity relating itself to itself and in this abstraction there is as yet no
real difference.
In time, it is said, everything arises and passes away, or rather, there appears precisely the abstraction of
arising and falling away. If abstractions are made from everything, namely, from the fullness of time just as
much as from the fullness of space, then there remains both empty time and empty space left over; that is,
there are then posited these abstractions of exteriority.-But time itself is this becoming, this existing
abstraction, the Chronos who gives birth to everything and destroys his offspring.-That which is real,
however, is just as identical to as distinct from time. Everything is transitory that is temporal, that is, exists
only in time or, like the concept, is not in itself pure negativity. To be sure, this negativity is in everything as
its immanent, universal essence, but the temporal is not adequate to this essence, and therefore relates to this
negativity in terms of its power. Time itself is eternal, for it is neither just any time, nor the moment now, but
time as time is its concept. The concept, however, in its identity with itself I= 1, is in and for itself absolute
negativity and freedom. Time, is not, therefore, the power of the concept, nor is the concept in time and
temporal; on the contrary, the concept is the power of time, which is only this negativity as externality.-The
natural is therefore subordinate to time, insofar as it is finite; that which is true, by contrast, the idea, the
spirit, is eternal. Thus the concept of eternity must not be grasped as if it were suspended time, or in any case
not in the sense that eternity would come after time, for this would turn eternity into the future, in other words
into a moment of time. And the concept of eternity must also not be understood in the sense of a negation of
time, so that it would be merely an abstraction of time. For time in its concept is, like the concept itself
generally, eternal, and therefore also absolute presence.

 4 202.
The dimensions of time, the present, future, and past, are only that which is becoming and its dissolution into
the differences of being as the transition into nothingness, and of Nothingness as the transition into being.
The immediate disappearance of these differences into individuality is the present as now, which is itself only
this disappearance of being into nothingness, and of nothingness into being.
(1) The finite present is differentiated from the infinite in that the finite is the moment now and hence as its
abstract moments, as past and future, which is different from the infinite as from the concrete unity. Eternity
as concept, h r, contains these moments in itself and its concrete unity is therefore not the moment now,
because it is motionless identity, concrete being as universal, and not that which is disappearing into
nothingness, as becoming.-Furthermore in nature, where time is now, there does not occur the subsisting
difference of these dimensions; they are necessarily only in subjective representation, in memory, fear, or
hope. The abstract past, however, and future of time is space, as the suspended space is at first the point and
time.
(2) There is no science of time in opposition to the finite science of space, geometry, because the differences
of time do not have the indifference of being outside of itself which constitutes the immediate determinacy of
space, and therefore they can not be expressed as spatial configurations. The principle of time only reaches
this ability when the understanding has paralysed it and reduced its negativity to the unit. This motionless
unit, as the sheer carnality of thought, can be used to form external combinations, and these, the numbers of
arithmetic, can themselves be brought under the categories of the truth as intuition or as understanding merely
for itself because the latter is only abstract, whereas the former is concrete. This dead unit, now the highest
externality of thought, can be used to form external combinations, and these combinations, the figures of
arithmetic, can in turn be organised by the determination of the understanding in terms of equality and
inequality, identity and difference. The science which has unity as its principle is therefore constituted in
opposition to geometry.
(3) The name of mathematics has moreover been used for the philosophical observation of space and time,
because it lies close to this observation, despite the fact that mathematics, as noted, considers strictly the
determinations of magnitude of its objects and not time itself but only the unit in its configurations and
connections. To be sure, time becomes in the theory of movement an object of science, but applied
mathematics is generally not an immanent science, precisely because it involves the application of pure
mathematics to a given material and its determinations as derived from experience.
(4) One could still, however, conceive the thought of a philosophical mathematics, namely, as a science
which would recognise those concepts which constitute what the conventional mathematical science of the
understanding derives from its presupposed determinations, and according to the method of the
understanding, without concepts. However, since mathematics is the science of the finite determinations of
magnitude, which remain fixed in their finitude and valid, and should not change in transit, thus it is
essentially a science of the understanding. And since it has the ability to express spatial figures and numbers,
which gives it an advantage over other sciences of this kind, it ought to retain this ability for itself and to
avoid contamination by either concepts, like time, which are heterogeneous to it, or empirical purposes. It
therefore remains open for the concept to establish a more fundamental consciousness than has hitherto been
shown, both in terms of the leading principles of the understanding and in terms of order and its necessity in
arithmetical operations, as well as in the theses of geometry.-If one wanted to treat the forms of space and
the unit philosophically, they would lose on these grounds their particular significance, a philosophy of them
would become a matter of logic, or would even assume the character of another concrete philosophical
science, according to the ways one imparted a more concrete significance to the concepts.-

 5It would, however, be a superfluous and thankless task to try to use such an unmanageable and inadequate
medium as spatial figures and numbers for the expression of thoughts, and to treat them violently for this
purpose. For the specific concept would always be related only externally to them. The simple elementary
figures and numbers can in any case be used as symbols, which, however, are a subordinate and poor
expression for thoughts. The first attempts of pure thought took recourse to such aids: the Pythagorean
system of numbers is the famous example of this. But with richer concepts these means became completely
unsatisfactory, since their external juxtaposition and contingent combination are not at all appropriate to the
nature of the concept, and make it altogether ambiguous which of the many possible relationships in complex
numbers and figures should be adhered to. Besides, the fluid character of the concept is dissipated in such an
external medium, in which each determination falls into the indifferent being outside the others. This
ambiguity could only be removed by an explanation. The essential expression of the thought is in that case
this explanation, and this symbolising is an empty superfluity.
Other mathematical determinations, such as infinity and its relationships, the infinitesimal, factors, powers,
and so ' on, have their true concepts in philosophy itself. It is awkward to want to take and derive these from
mathematics, where they are employed in a nonconceptual, often meaningless way; rather, they must await
their justification and significance from philosophy. The truly philosophical science of mathematics as theory
of magnitude would be the science of measures, but this already presupposes the real particularity of things,
which is only at hand in concrete nature.
 203.
(5) Space and time constitute the idea in and for itself, with space the real or immediately objective side and
time the purely subjective side. Space is in itself the contradiction of indifferent being outside of others and
undifferentiated continuity, and thereby the pure negativity of itself and the transition into time. Space
converts into the individuality of the place. Time is, equally, since its moments held together in unity suspend
themselves immediately, the immediate convergence into indifference, into undifferentiated being apart from
one another, or into space, so that its place is precisely in that way immediate as sheer indifferent spatiality.
This disappearance and regeneration of space in time and of time in space is motion;-a becoming, which,
however, is itself just as much immediately the identically existing unity of both, or matter.
The transition from ideality to reality, from abstraction to concrete existence, in this case from space and time
to reality, which appears as matter, is incomprehensible to the understanding, and always converts therefore
externally for the understanding, and as a given entity. The usual conception is to take space and time as
empty and to be filled with matter from the outside. In this way material things are, on the one hand, to be
taken as indifferent to space and time, and on the other hand to be taken at the same time as essentially spatial
and temporal.
What is usually said of matter is: (a) that it is composite; this refers to its identity with space. Insofar as
abstractions are made from time and from all form generally, it is asserted that matter is eternal and
immutable. In fact, this follows immediately, but such a matter is also only an untrue abstraction. (b) It is said
that matter is impenetrable and offers resistance, is tangible, visible, and so on. These predicates mean
nothing else than that matter exists, partly for specific forms of perception, in general for an other, but partly
just as much for itself Both of these are determinations which belong to matter precisely because it is the
identity of space and time, of immediate being apart from itself or of becoming.
The transition of ideality into reality is demonstrated therefore in the familiar mechanical phenomena,
namely, that ideality can take the place of reality and vice versa; and only the usual thoughtlessness of the
representation and of the understanding are to blame that, for them, their identity does not derive from the
interchangeability of both. In connection with the lever, for example, distance can be posited in the place of
mass and vice versa, and a quantum of the ideal moment produces the same effect as the corresponding real

 6moment.
Similarly, velocity, in the magnitude of motion, the quantitative relationship of space and time, represents
mass, and conversely, the same real effect emerges if the mass is increased and the velocity proportionately
decreased. By itself a brick does not kill a person, but produces this effect only though the velocity it
achieves, in other words, the person is killed through space and time.
It is force, a category of reflection fixed by the understanding, which presents itself here as the ultimate, and
therefore prevents understanding and lets it seem superfluous to inquire further after the concept. But this at
least appears without thought, namely, that the effect of force is something real and appealing to the senses,
and in force there is realised that which is in its expression; indeed, it appears that force achieves precisely
this force of its expression through the relationship of its ideal moments, of space and time.
Further, it is also in keeping with this nonconceptual reflection that "forces' are seen as implanted in matter,
and as originally external to it, so that this very identity of time-and space, which vaguely appears in the
reflective category of force, and which in truth constitutes the essence of matter, is posited as something alien
to it and contingent, something introduced into it from outside.

A. Mechanics - B. Elementary Physics - C. The Physics of Individuality
 204.
Matter in itself holds itself apart from itself through the moment of its negativity, diversity, or abstract
separation into parts; it has repulsion. Its being apart from itself is just as essential, however, because these
differences are one and the same: the negative unity of this existence apart from itself as being for itself, and
thus continuous. Matter therefore has attraction. The unity of these moments is gravity.
Kant has, among other things, through the attempt at a "construction" of matter in his metaphysical elements
of the natural sciences, the merit of having started towards a concept of matter, after it had been attributed
merely to the deadness of the understanding and its determinations had been conceived as the relations of
attributes. With this attempt Kant revived the concept of the philosophy of nature, which is nothing other than
the comprehension of nature or, what is the same, the knowledge of the concept in nature. But in so doing he
assumed that the reflective categories of attraction and repulsion were readymade, and further, he
presupposed that the category of the reflection itself out of which matter should emerge, is readymade. This
confusion is a necessary consequence of Kant's procedure, because the former abstract moments can not be
conceptualised without their identity; moreover, because the observation of these opposing determinations
suspends itself immediately in their identity, there is the danger that they will appear, like attraction, as a
mere continuity. I have demonstrated in detail the confusion which dominates Kant's exposition in my system
of Logic, vol. 1, part 1, pp. 119ff.
 205.
Matter, as having gravity, is only: (1) matter existing in itself or general. But this concept must: (2) specify
itself; thus it is elementary matter, and the object of elementary physics. (3) Particular matter taken together is
individualised matter, and the object of physics as the actual world of the body.
A. Mechanics

 7 206.
Matter, as simply general, has at first only a quantitative difference, and particularises itself into different
quanta, - masses, which, in the superficial determination of a whole or one, are bodies.
 207.
The body is: (1) as heavy matter the solid identity of space and time, but (2) as the first negation it has in
itself their ideality, which differentiates them from each other and from the body. The body is essentially in
space and time, of which it constitutes its indifferent content in contrast to this form.
 208.
(3) As space, in which time is suspended, the body is enduring, and (4) as time, in which the indifferent
subsistence of space is suspended, the body is transitory. In general, it is a wholly contingent unit. (5) But as
the unity which binds together the two moments in their opposition, the body essentially has motion, and the
appearance of gravity.
Because the forces have been seen as only implanted onto matter, motion in particular is considered to be a
determination external to the body, even by that physics which is presumably scientific. It has thus become a
leading axiom of mechanics that the body is set in motion or placed into a condition only by an external
cause. On the one hand it is the understanding which holds motion and rest apart as nonconceptual
determinations, and therefore does not grasp their transition into each other, but on the other hand only the
selfless bodies of the earth,. which are the object of ordinary mechanics, appear in this representation. The
determinations, which occur in the appearance of such bodies and are valid, are set as the foundation, and the
nature of the independent bodies is subsumed under this category. In fact, however, the latter are truly more
general and the former is that which is subsumed absolutely, and in absolute mechanics the concept presents
itself in its truth and singularity.
 209.
