Philosophy of History.
Introduction.
The subject of this course of Lectures is the Philosophical
History of the World. And by this must be understood, not a
collection of general observations respecting it, suggested by the
study of its records, and proposed to be illustrated by its facts,
but Universal History itself.2 To gain a clear idea, at the outset,
of the nature of our task, it seems necessary to begin with an
examination of the other methods of treating History. The
various methods may be ranged under three heads:
I. Original History.
II. Reflective History.
III. Philosophical History.
I. Of the first kind, the mention of one or two distinguished
names will furnish a definite type. To this category belong
Herodotus, Thucydides, and other historians of the same order,
whose descriptions are for the most part limited to deeds, events,
and states of society, which they had before their eyes, and
whose spirit they shared. They simply transferred what was
passing in the world around them, to the realm of representative
intellect. An external phenomenon is thus translated into an
internal conception. In the same way the poet operates upon the 15
material supplied him by his emotions; projecting it into an
image for the conceptive faculty. These original historians did,
it is true, find statements and narratives of other men ready to
hand. One person cannot be an eye or ear witness of everything.
But they make use of such aids only as the poet does of that
heritage of an already-formed language, to which he owes so
much: merely as an ingredient. Historiographers bind together
the fleeting elements of story, and treasure them up for
immortality in the Temple of Mnemosyne. Legends, Balladstories, Traditions, must be excluded from such original history.
These are but dim and hazy forms of historical apprehension, and
therefore belong to nations whose intelligence is but half
awakened. Here, on the contrary, we have to do with people fully
conscious of what they were and what they were about. The
domain of reality — actually seen, or capable of being so —
affords a very different basis in point of firmness from that
fugitive and shadowy element, in which were engendered those
legends and poetic dreams whose historical prestige vanishes, as
soon as nations have attained a mature individuality.
Such original historians, then, change the events, the deeds,
and the states of society with which they are conversant, into an
object for the conceptive faculty. The narratives they leave us
cannot, therefore, be very comprehensive in their range.
Herodotus, Thucydides, Guicciardini, may be taken as fair
samples of the class in this respect. What is present and living in
their environment is their proper material. The influences that
have formed the writer are identical with those which have
moulded the events that constitute the matter of his story. The
author’s spirit, and that of the actions he narrates, is one and the
same. He describes scenes in which he himself has been an actor,
or at any rate an interested spectator. It is short periods of time,
individual shapes of persons and occurrences, single, unreflected
traits, of which he makes his picture. And his aim is nothing
more than the presentation to posterity of an image of events as
clear as that which he himself possessed in virtue of personal
observation, or life-like descriptions. Reflections are none of his
business, for he lives in the spirit of his subject; he has not
attained an elevation above it. If, as in Caesar’s case, he belongs 16
to the exalted rank of generals or statesmen, it is the prosecution
of his own aims that constitutes the history.
Such speeches as we find in Thucydides (for example) of
which we can positively assert that they are not bona fide reports,
would seem to make against out statement that a historian of his
class presents us no reflected picture; that persons and people
appear in his works in propria persona. Speeches, it must be
allowed, are veritable transactions in the human commonwealth;
in fact, very gravely influential transactions. It is indeed, often
said, “Such and such things are only talk;” by way of
demonstrating their harmlessness. That for which this excuse is
brought may be mere “talk”; and talk enjoys the important
privilege of being harmless. But addresses of peoples to peoples,
or orations directed to nations and to princes, are integrant
constituents of history. Granted that such orations as those of
Pericles — that most profoundly accomplished, genuine, noble
statesman — were elaborated by Thucydides, it must yet be
maintained that they were not foreign to the character of the
speaker. In the orations in question, these men proclaim the
maxims adopted by their countrymen, and which formed their
own character; they record their views of their political relations,
and of their moral and spiritual nature; and the principles of their
designs and conduct. What the historian puts into their mouths is
no supposititious system of ideas, but an uncorrupted transcript
of their intellectual and moral habitudes.
Of these historians, whom we must make thoroughly our own,
with whom we must linger long, if we would live with their
respective nations, and enter deeply into their spirit: of these
historians, to whose pages we may turn not for the purposes of
erudition merely, but with a view to deep and genuine
enjoyment, there are fewer than might be imagined. Herodotus
the Father, i.e., the Founder of History, and Thucydides have
been already mentioned. Xenophon’s Retreat of the Ten
Thousand, is a work equally original. Caesar’s Commentaries are
the simple masterpiece of a mighty spirit. Among the ancients,
these annalists were necessarily great captains and statesmen. In
the Middle Ages, if we except the Bishops, who were placed in
the very centre of the political world, the Monks monopolize this 17
category as naive chroniclers who were as decidedly isolated
from active life as those elder annalists had been connected with
it. In modern times the relations are entirely altered. Our culture
is essentially comprehensive, and immediately changes all events
into historical representations. Belonging to the class in question,
we have vivid, simple, clear narrations — especially of military
transactions — which might fairly take their place with those of
Caesar. In richness of matter and fulness of detail as regards
strategic appliances, and attendant circumstances, they are even
more instructive. The French “Mémoires,” also, fall under this
category. In many cases these are written by men of mark,
though relating to affairs of little note. They not unfrequently
contain a large proportion of anecdotal matter, so that the ground
they occupy is narrow and trivial. Yet they are often veritable
masterpieces in history; as those of Cardinal de Retz, which in
fact trench on a larger historical field. In Germany such masters
are rare. Frederick the Great (“Histoire de Mon Temps”) is an
illustrious exception. Writers of this order must occupy an
elevated position. Only from such a position is it possible to take
an extensive view of affairs — to see everything. This is out of
the question for him, who from below merely gets a glimpse of
the great world through a miserable cranny.
II. The second kind of history we may call the reflective. It is
history whose mode of representation is not really confined by
the limits of the time to which it relates, but whose spirit
transcends the present. In this second order a strongly marked
variety of species may be distinguished.
I. It is the aim of the investigator to gain a view of the entire
history of a people or a country, or of the world, in short, what
we call Universal History. In this case the working up of the
historical material is the main point. The workman approaches
his task with his own spirit; a spirit distinct from that of the
element he is to manipulate. Here a very important consideration
will be the principles to which the author refers the bearing and
motives of the actions and events which he describes, and those
which determine the form of his narrative. Among us Germans
this reflective treatment and the display of ingenuity which it
occasions assume a manifold variety of phases. Every writer of 18
history proposes to himself an original method. The English and
French confess to general principles of historical composition.
Their standpoint is more that of cosmopolitan or of national
culture. Among us each labors to invent a purely individual point
of view. Instead of writing history, we are always beating our
brains to discover how history ought to be written. This first kind
of Reflective History is most nearly akin to the preceding, when
it has no farther aim than to present the annals of a country
complete. Such compilations (among which may be reckoned the
works of Livy, Diodorus Siculus, Johannes von Müller’s History
of Switzerland) are, if well performed, highly meritorious.
Among the best of the kind may be reckoned such annalists as
approach those of the first class; who give so vivid a transcript
of events that the reader may well fancy himself listening to
contemporaries and eye- witnesses. But it often happens that the
individuality of tone which must characterize a writer belonging
to a different culture is not modified in accordance with the
periods such a record must traverse. The spirit of the writer is
quite other than that of the times of which he treats. Thus Livy
puts into the mouths of the old Roman kings, consuls, and
generals such orations as would be delivered by an accomplished
advocate of the Livian era, and which strikingly contrast with the
genuine traditions of Roman antiquity (e.g., the fable of
Menenius Agrippa). In the same way he gives us descriptions of
battles, as if he had been an actual spectator; but whose features
would serve well enough for battles in any period, and whose
distinctness contrasts on the other hand with the want of
connection and the inconsistency that prevail elsewhere, even in
his treatment of chief points of interest. The difference between
such a compiler and an original historian may be best seen by
comparing Polybius himself with the style in which Livy uses,
expands, and abridges his annals in those periods of which
Polybius’s account has been preserved. Johannes von Müller has
given a stiff, formal, pedantic aspect to his history, in the
endeavor to remain faithful in his portraiture to the times he
describes. We much prefer the narratives we find in old Tschudy.
All is more naive and natural than it appears in the garb of a
fictitious and affected archaism. 19
A history which aspires to traverse long periods of time, or to
be universal, must indeed forego the attempt to give individual
representations of the past as it actually existed. It must
foreshorten its pictures by abstractions; and this includes not
merely the omission of events and deeds, but whatever is
involved in the fact that Thought is, after all, the most trenchant
epitomist. A battle, a great victory, a siege, no longer maintains
its original proportions, but is put off with a bare mention. When
Livy, e.g., tells us of the wars with the Volsci, we sometimes
have the brief announcement: “This year war was carried on with
the Volsci.”
2. A second species of Reflective History is what we may call
the Pragmatical. When we have to deal with the Past, and
occupy ourselves with a remote world, a Present rises into being
for the mind — produced by its own activity, as the reward of its
labor. The occurrences are, indeed, various; but the idea which
pervades them — their deeper import and connection — is one.
This takes the occurrence out of the category of the Past and
makes it virtually Present. Pragmatical (didactic) reflections,
though in their nature decidedly abstract, are truly and
indefeasibly of the Present, and quicken the annals of the dead
Past with the life of to-day. Whether, indeed, such reflections are
truly interesting and enlivening, depends on the writer’s own
spirit. Moral reflections must here be specially noticed — the
moral teaching expected from history; which latter has not
infrequently been treated with a direct view to the former. It may
be allowed that examples of virtue elevate the soul, and are
applicable in the moral instruction of children for impressing
excellence upon their minds. But the destinies of peoples and
states, their interests, relations, and the complicated tissue of
their affairs, present quite another field. Rulers, Statesmen,
Nations, are wont to be emphatically commended to the teaching
which experience offers in history. But what experience and
history teach is this — that peoples and governments never have
learned anything from history, or acted on principles deduced
from it. Each period is involved in such peculiar circumstances,
exhibits a condition of things so strictly idiosyncratic, that its
conduct must be regulated by considerations connected with 20
itself, and itself alone. Amid the pressure of great events, a
general principle gives no help. It is useless to revert to similar
circumstances in the Past. The pallid shades of memory struggle
in vain with the life and freedom of the Present. Looked at in this
light, nothing can be shallower than the oft-repeated appeal to
Greek and Roman examples during the French Revolution.
Nothing is more diverse than the genius of those nations and that
of our times. Johannes v. Müller, in his “Universal History,” as
also in his “History of Switzerland,” had such moral aims in
view. He designed to prepare a body of political doctrines for the
instruction of princes, governments, and peoples (he formed a
special collection of doctrines and reflections — frequently
giving us in his correspondence the exact number of
apophthegms which he had compiled in a week); but he cannot
reckon this part of his labor as among the best that he
accomplished. It is only a thorough, liberal, comprehensive view
of historical relations (such e.g., as we find in Montesquieu’s
“Esprit des Lois”) that can give truth and interest to reflections
of this order. One Reflective History, therefore, supersedes
another. The materials are patent to every writer: each is likely
enough to believe himself capable of arranging and manipulating
them; and we may expect that each will insist upon his own spirit
as that of the age in question. Disgusted by such reflective
histories, readers have often returned with pleasure to a narrative
adopting no particular point of view. These certainly have their
value; but for the most part they offer only material for history.
We Germans are content with such. The French, on the other
hand, display great genius in reanimating bygone times, and in
bringing the past to bear upon the present condition of things.
3. The third form of Reflective History is the Critical. This
deserves mention as pre-eminently the mode of treating history
now current in Germany. It is not history itself that is here
presented. We might more properly designate it as a History of
History; a criticism of historical narratives and an investigation
of their truth and credibility. Its peculiarity in point of fact and of
intention, consists in the acuteness with which the writer extorts
something from the records which was not in the matters
recorded. The French have given us much that is profound and 21
judicious in this class of composition. But they have not
endeavored to pass a merely critical procedure for substantial
history. They have duly presented their judgments in the form of
critical treatises. Among us, the so-called “higher criticism,”
which reigns supreme in the domain of philology, has also taken
possession of our historical literature. This “higher criticism” has
been the pretext for introducing all the anti-historical
monstrosities that a vain imagination could suggest. Here we
have the other method of making the past a living reality; putting
subjective fancies in the place of historical data; fancies whose
merit is measured by their boldness, that is, the scantiness of the
particulars on which they are based, and the peremptoriness with
which they contravene the best established facts of history.
4. The last species of Reflective History announces its
fragmentary character on the very face of it. It adopts an abstract
position; yet, since it takes general points of view (e.g., as the
History of Art, of Law, of Religion), it forms a transition to the
Philosophical History of the World. In our time this form of the
history of ideas has been more developed and brought into
notice. Such branches of national life stand in close relation to
the entire complex of a people’s annals; and the question of chief
importance in relation to our subject is, whether the connection
of the whole is exhibited in its truth and reality, or referred to
merely external relations. In the latter case, these important
phenomena (Art, Law, Religion, etc.) appear as purely accidental
national peculiarities. It must be remarked that, when Reflective
History has advanced to the adoption of general points of view,
if the position taken is a true one, these are found to constitute —
not a merely external thread, a superficial series — but are the
inward guiding soul of the occurrences and actions that occupy
a nation’s annals. For, like the soul-conductor Mercury, the Idea
is in truth, the leader of peoples and of the World; and Spirit, the
rational and necessitated will of that conductor, is and has been
the director of the events of the World’s History. To become
acquainted with Spirit in this its office of guidance, is the object
of our present undertaking. This brings us to
III. The third kind of history — the Philosophical. No
explanation was needed of the two previous classes; their nature 22
was self-evident. It is otherwise with this last, which certainly
seems to require an exposition or justification. The most general
definition that can be given, is, that the Philosophy of History
means nothing but the thoughtful consideration of it. Thought is,
indeed, essential to humanity. It is this that distinguishes us from
the brutes. In sensation, cognition, and intellection; in our
instincts and volitions, as far as they are truly human, Thought is
an invariable element. To insist upon Thought in this connection
with history may, however, appear unsatisfactory. In this science
it would seem as if Thought must be subordinate to what is
given, to the realities of fact; that this is its basis and guide: while
Philosophy dwells in the region of self-produced ideas, without
reference to actuality. Approaching history thus prepossessed,
Speculation might be expected to treat it as a mere passive
material; and, so far from leaving it in its native truth, to force it
into conformity with a tyrannous idea, and to construe it, as the
phrase is, “à priori.” But as it is the business of history simply to
adopt into its records what is and has been — actual occurrences
and transactions; and since it remains true to its character in
proportion as it strictly adheres to its data, we seem to have in
Philosophy, a process diametrically opposed to that of the
historiographer. This contradiction, and the charge consequently
brought against speculation, shall be explained and confuted. We
do not, however, propose to correct the innumerable special
misrepresentations, trite or novel, that are current respecting the
aims, the interests, and the modes of treating history, and its
relation to Philosophy.
The only Thought which Philosophy brings with it to the
contemplation of History, is the simple conception of Reason;
that Reason is the Sovereign of the World; that the history of the
world, therefore, presents us with a rational process. This
conviction and intuition is a hypothesis in the domain of history
as such. In that of Philosophy it is no hypothesis. It is there
proved by speculative cognition, that Reason — and this term
may here suffice us, without investigating the relation sustained
by the Universe to the Divine Being — is Substance, as well as
Infinite Power; its own Infinite Material underlying all the
natural and spiritual life which it originates, as also the Infinite 23
Form — that which sets this Material in motion. On the one
hand, Reason is the substance of the Universe; viz., that by
which and in which all reality has its being and subsistence. On
the other hand, it is the Infinite Energy of the Universe; since
Reason is not so powerless as to be incapable of producing
anything but a mere ideal, a mere intention — having its place
outside reality, nobody knows where; something separate and
abstract, in the heads of certain human beings. It is the infinite
complex of things, their entire Essence and Truth. It is its own
material which it commits to its own Active Energy to work up;
not needing, as finite action does, the conditions of an external
material of given means from which it may obtain its support,
and the objects of its activity. It supplies its own nourishment,
and is the object of its own operations. While it is exclusively its
own basis of existence, and absolute final aim, it is also the
energizing power realizing this aim; developing it not only in the
phenomena of the Natural, but also of the Spiritual Universe —
the History of the World. That this “Idea” or “Reason” is the
True, the Eternal, the absolutely powerful essence; that it reveals
itself in the World, and that in that World nothing else is
revealed but this and its honor and glory — is the thesis which,
as we have said, has been proved in Philosophy, and is here
regarded as demonstrated.
In those of my hearers who are not acquainted with
Philosophy, I may fairly presume, at least, the existence of a
belief in Reason, a desire, a thirst for acquaintance with it, in
entering upon this course of Lectures. It is, in fact, the wish for
rational insight, not the ambition to amass a mere heap of
acquirements, that should be presupposed in every case as
possessing the mind of the learner in the study of science. If the
clear idea of Reason is not already developed in our minds, in
beginning the study of Universal History, we should at least have
the firm, unconquerable faith that Reason does exist there; and
that the World of intelligence and conscious volition is not
abandoned to chance, but must show itself in the light of the selfcognizant Idea. Yet I am not obliged to make any such
preliminary demand upon your faith. What I have said thus
provisionally, and what I shall have further to say, is, even in 24
reference to our branch of science, not to be regarded as
hypothetical, but as a summary view of the whole; the result of
the investigation we are about to pursue; a result which happens
to be known to me, because I have traversed the entire field. It is
only an inference from the history of the World, that its
development has been a rational process; that the history in
question has constituted the rational necessary course of the
World-Spirit — that Spirit whose nature is always one and the
same, but which unfolds this its one nature in the phenomena of
the World’s existence. This must, as before stated, present itself
as the ultimate result of History. But we have to take the latter as
it is. We must proceed historically — empirically. Among other
precautions we must take care not to be misled by professed
historians who (especially among the Germans, and enjoying a
considerable authority), are chargeable with the very procedure
of which they accuse the Philosopher — introducing à priori
inventions of their own into the records of the Past. It is, for
example, a widely current fiction, that there was an original
primeval people, taught immediately by God, endowed with
perfect insight and wisdom, possessing a thorough knowledge of
all natural laws and spiritual truth; that there have been such or
such sacerdotal peoples; or, to mention a more specific averment,
that there was a Roman Epos, from which the Roman historians
derived the early annals of their city, etc. Authorities of this kind
we leave to those talented historians by profession, among whom
(in Germany at least) their use is not uncommon. — We might
then announce it as the first condition to be observed, that we
should faithfully adopt all that is historical. But in such general
expressions themselves, as “faithfully” and “adopt,” lies the
ambiguity. Even the ordinary, the “impartial” historiographer,
who believes and professes that he maintains a simply receptive
attitude; surrendering himself only to the data supplied him — is
by no means passive as regards the exercise of his thinking
powers. He brings his categories with him, and sees the
phenomena presented to his mental vision, exclusively through
these media. And, especially in all that pretends to the name of
science, it is indispensable that Reason should not sleep — that
reflection should be in full play. To him who looks upon the 25
world rationally, the world in its turn presents a rational aspect.
The relation is mutual. But the various exercises of reflection —
the different points of view — the modes of deciding the simple
question of the relative importance of events (the first category
that occupies the attention of the historian), do not belong to this
place.
I will only mention two phases and points of view that concern
the generally diffused conviction that Reason has ruled, and is
still ruling in the world, and consequently in the world’s history;
because they give us, at the same time, an opportunity for more
closely investigating the question that presents the greatest
difficulty, and for indicating a branch of the subject, which will
have to be enlarged on in the sequel.
I. One of these points is, that passage in history, which informs
us that the Greek Anaxagoras was the first to enunciate the
doctrine that , Understanding generally, or Reason, governs
the world. It is not intelligence as self-conscious Reason — not
a Spirit as such that is meant; and we must clearly distinguish
these from each other. The movement of the solar system takes
place according to unchangeable laws. These laws are Reason,
implicit in the phenomena in question. But neither the sun nor
the planets, which revolve around it according to these laws, can
be said to have any consciousness of them.
A thought of this kind — that Nature is an embodiment of
Reason; that it is unchangeably subordinate to universal laws,
appears nowise striking or strange to us. We are accustomed to
such conceptions, and find nothing extraordinary in them. And
I have mentioned this extraordinary occurrence, partly to show
how history teaches, that ideas of this kind, which may seem
trivial to us, have not always been in the world; that, on the
contrary, such a thought makes an epoch in the annals of human
intelligence. Aristotle says of Anaxagoras, as the originator of
the thought in question, that he appeared as a sober man among
the drunken. Socrates adopted the doctrine from Anaxagoras, and
it forthwith became the ruling idea in Philosophy — except in the
school of Epicurus, who ascribed all events to chance. “I was
delighted with the sentiment” — Plato makes Socrates say —
“and hoped I had found a teacher who would show me Nature in 26
harmony with Reason, who would demonstrate in each particular
phenomenon its specific aim, and in the whole, the grand object
of the Universe. I would not have surrendered this hope for a
great deal. But how very much was I disappointed, when, having
zealously applied myself to the writings of Anaxagoras, I found
that he adduces only external causes, such as Atmosphere, Ether,
Water, and the like.” It is evident that the defect which Socrates
complains of respecting Anaxagoras’s doctrine, does not concern
the principle itself, but the shortcoming of the propounder in
applying it to Nature in the concrete. Nature is not deduced from
that principle: the latter remains in fact a mere abstraction,
inasmuch as the former is not comprehended and exhibited as a
development of it — an organization produced by and from
Reason. I wish, at the very outset, to call your attention to the
important difference between a conception, a principle, a truth
limited to an abstract form and its determinate application, and
concrete development. This distinction affects the whole fabric
of philosophy; and among other bearings of it there is one to
which we shall have to revert at the close of our view of
Universal History, in investigating the aspect of political affairs
in the most recent period.
We have next to notice the rise of this idea — that Reason
directs the World — in connection with a further application of
it, well known to us — in the form, viz., of the religious truth,
that the world is not abandoned to chance and external
contingent causes, but that a Providence controls it. I stated
above, that I would not make a demand on your faith, in regard
to the principle announced. Yet I might appeal to your belief in
it, in this religious aspect, if, as a general rule, the nature of
philosophical science allowed it to attach authority to
presuppositions. To put it in another shape — this appeal is
forbidden, because the science of which we have to treat,
proposes itself to furnish the proof (not indeed of the abstract
Truth of the doctrine, but) of its correctness as compared with
facts. The truth, then, that a Providence (that of God) presides
over the events of the World — consorts with the proposition in
question; for Divine Providence is Wisdom, endowed with an
infinite Power, which realizes its aim, viz., the absolute rational 27
design of the World. Reason is Thought conditioning itself with
perfect freedom. But a difference — rather a contradiction —
will manifest itself, between this belief and our principle, just as
was the case in reference to the demand made by Socrates in the
case of Anaxagoras’s dictum. For that belief is similarly
indefinite; it is what is called a belief in a general Providence,
and is not followed out into definite application, or displayed in
its bearing on the grand total — the entire course of human
history. But to explain History is to depict the passions of
mankind, the genius, the active powers, that play their part on the
great stage; and the providentially determined process which
these exhibit, constitutes what is generally called the “plan” of
Providence. Yet it is this very plan which is supposed to be
concealed from our view: which it is deemed presumption, even
to wish to recognize. The ignorance of Anaxagoras, as to how
intelligence reveals itself in actual existence, was ingenuous.
Neither in his consciousness, nor in that of Greece at large, had
that thought been farther expanded. He had not attained the
power to apply his general principle to the concrete, so as to
deduce the latter from the former. It was Socrates who took the
first step in comprehending the union of the Concrete with the
Universal. Anaxagoras, then, did not take up a hostile position
toward such an application. The common belief in Providence
does; at least it opposes the use of the principle on the large
scale, and denies the possibility of discerning the plan of
Providence. In isolated cases this plan is supposed to be
manifest. Pious persons are encouraged to recognize in particular
circumstances, something more than mere chance; to
acknowledge the guiding hand of God; e.g., when help has
unexpectedly come to an individual in great perplexity and need.
But these instances of providential design are of a limited kind,
and concern the accomplishment of nothing more than the
desires of the individual in question. But in the history of the
World, the Individuals we have to do with are Peoples; Totalities
that are States. We cannot, therefore, be satisfied with what we
may call this “peddling” view of Providence, to which the belief
alluded to limits itself. Equally unsatisfactory is the merely
abstract, undefined belief in a Providence, when that belief is not 28
brought to bear upon the details of the process which it conducts.
On the contrary our earnest endeavor must be directed to the
recognition of the ways of Providence, the means it uses, and the
historical phenomena in which it manifests itself; and we must
show their connection with the general principle above
mentioned. But in noticing the recognition of the plan of Divine
Providence generally, I have implicitly touched upon a
prominent question of the day; viz., that of the possibility of
knowing God: or rather — since public opinion has ceased to
allow it to be a matter of question — the doctrine that it is
impossible to know God. In direct contravention of what is
commanded in holy Scripture as the highest duty — that we
should not merely love, but know God — the prevalent dogma
involves the denial of what is there said; viz., that it is the Spirit
(der Geist) that leads into Truth, knows all things, penetrates
even into the deep things of the Godhead. While the Divine
Being is thus placed beyond our knowledge, and outside the limit
of all human things, we have the convenient license of
wandering as far as we list, in the direction of our own fancies.
