Subjective Spirit

Preliminary Concepts
§ 299

Spirit has for us nature as its presupposition, of which it is truth. In this truth, its concept, nature has disappeared; spirit has therefore produced itself as idea, of which the concept is both the object and the subject. This identity is absolute negativity, because in nature the concept has its completely external objectivity. But it has suspended its articulation, and in this it has become identical with itself. It is this identity only insofar as it is a return from nature.

§ 300.

The essence of the spirit is therefore freedom, the identity of the absolute negativity of the concept with itself. It can distance itself from everything external and from its own externality as well as from its being, and thus bear infinite pain, the negation of its individual immediacy; in other words, it can be identical for itself in this negativity. This possibility is its self-contained being in itself its simple concept, or absolute generality itself.

§ 301

This generality is also, however, its determinate sphere of being. With a being of its own the general is self-particularising, yet remains self-identical. The nature of the spirit is therefore manifestation. The spirit is not determinate as a being in itself and against its externality, nor does it reveal something. Instead, its determinacy and content are this revelation itself. Its possibility is therefore an immediate, infinite and absolute reality.

§ 302

The revelation is the positing of its objectivity, which is in the abstract idea as the immediate transition or becoming of nature. But the revelation of the spirit, which is free, is the positing of nature as its world; a setting forth, which as reflection is at the same time the presupposition of the world as a nature existing independently. But the true revelation is revelation in the concept, the creation of the world as its being, a being in which the spirit has the positivity and truth of its freedom.

The absolute is the spirit; this is the highest definition of the absolute.— To find this definition and to comprehend its content was, it can be said, the absolute tendency of all education and philosophy. It was the point on which all religion and science turned, and World history is to be comprehended on the basis of this point alone.— But the essence of the spirit is the concept. The word and the representation of the spirit were found at an early period, and the content of the Christian religion is to reveal God as spirit. To grasp what is given here as representation, and the essence in itself in its own element, the concept, is the task of philosophy. But this task is not truly and immanently solved as long as the concept and freedom are not the issue and the soul of philosophy.

§ 303

This idea is the concept of the spirit; or it is this in itself as a universal entity. But it is only spirit absolutely insofar as it is the concept for itself or as individuality; and it is essentially for itself only as it is separated from itself. has its concept as a presupposition, and relates to itself as to its immediacy. This is nature, as the being of the spirit, which is therefore its beginning .

§ 304

This beginning is the first moment of its concrete concept, which in its totality: (a) grasps the subjective spirit in itself; (b) as objective spirit realises this concept; and (c) as absolute spirit is itself the unity of its concept and its objectivity.

§ 305

The two first parts of the doctrine of the spirit embrace the finite spirit. Spirit is the infinite idea, and finitude here means the disproportion between the concept and reality, with the qualification that it is a shining within itself – an appearance that the spirit itself posits as a barrier, in order, by its suspension, to have and to know freedom for itself as its essence. The different steps in the activity of the spirit are steps towards its liberation, and in the absolute truth of this liberation these three steps are one and the same: finding a world presupposed, the generation of the world as a world posited by the spirit, and gaining freedom from the world.

The category of finitude is primarily fixed by the understanding in relation to the spirit and reason. It is held not only as a matter of strict logic, but also treated as a moral and religious concern, so that to recognise it as a standpoint of modesty and to adhere to it as a last step, or the wish to go further, are taken as an audacity of thought, even as a mark of insanity.— In fact, however, such a modesty of thought is the worst of virtues, for it treats the finite as an absolute, and remains fixed in untruth and an ungrounded type of knowledge. The category of finitude was not only developed and explained at different points (cf. nos. 15, 34, 45, and so on), but logic must, for the simple thought forms of finitude, as the rest of philosophy will for concrete forms, only show that the finite is not fixed, but exists above all only as transition. It can, therefore, least of all be said that reason and the spirit are finite. There are finite spirits: this is the expression of the imagination which remains at the level of the untruth of immediate appearance, of that which is meant, of a being which the abstract understanding fixes through the form of abstract generality or identity. But the finite spirit is least of all just any finite entity, or being itself. and infinitely less, since other finite entities have their cessation through another; the spirit itself however, the concept and eternity, complete this nullification of nullity, the vanity of the vain. By contrast, the modesty alluded to is not only this vanity itself but the greater vanity, the fixation of vanity against truth. In the course of the development of the spirit, this vanity shall appear as wickedness at that turning point when mind has reached its extreme immersion in subjectivity, and its most central contradiction.

SECTION ONE: SUBJECTIVE SPIRIT
§ 307

Spirit can be called subjective insofar as it is in its concept. Since, however, the concept is the reflection of its generality originating from its differentiation in itself the subjective spirit is (a) immediate, the spirit of nature— the object usually treated by "anthropology" as "the soul"; (b) spirit as the identical reflection into itself and into others, relationship or differentiation— consciousness, the object of the Phenomenology of the Spirit, (c) spirit existing for itself or as subject— the object of "psychology." Consciousness awakes in the soul; consciousness posits itself as reason; and subjective reason frees itself for objectivity through its activity.

SECTION ONE: SUBJECTIVE SPIRIT

A.
The Soul
(a) Natural Determinacy - (b) Antithesis to Substance - (c) Reality of Soul

§ 308.

Spirit came into being as the truth of nature which has translated and suspended itself. But spirit is, then, not merely true and primordial: its transition into the realm of the concept is not only reflection into others and reflection into itself but it is also free judgment. The becoming of spirit in this way indicates that nature suspends itself in itself as untruth, and that spirit no longer presupposes itself as immediacy self-externalised in physical individuality, but as general and as that immediacy, simple in its concreteness, in which it is soul.


§ 309.

The soul is not only immaterial for itself but the general immateriality of nature and its simple, ideal life. The soul is also the absolute substance, as the immediate identity of self-subsisting subjectivity and corporeality, whose identity remains, as general essence, the absolute basis of its differentiation and individuation. In this abstract determination, however, it is only the sleep of the spirit.

The question of the immateriality of the soul can only be of interest if matter is represented as true, on the one hand, and on the other hand, if spirit is represented as a thing. Even physicists, however, have in recent times dealt with imponderable substances, such as warmth, light, and so on, to which they could also add space and time. Otherwise these imponderables still have a sensory existence, a self-externalised being. Yet living matter, which can be found included among such substances, lacks not only gravity, but every other aspect of existence which would allow us to treat it as material. The fact is that in the idea of life the self-externality of nature is already in itself suspended, along with the concept and its substance. But in the spirit, the concept exists in freedom as absolute negativity and not as immediate individuality, so that the object of the intelligible unity is the unity itself Thus self-externality, as the fundamental characteristic of matter, is completely dissolved and transformed into generality.

Another related question concerns the interdependence of the soul and the body. It was assumed as a fact, and the only remaining problem was how to comprehend it. The usual answer was that it was an incomprehensible secret. And indeed, if we take them to be absolutely antithetical and absolutely independent, body and soul are just as impenetrable to each other as every part of matter is to another. In this view they respond to each other only in the pores, their reciprocal being where the other is not. But this answer is not the same as the one given by all other philosophers since the relation was first questioned. Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza, and Leibniz have all seen God as this relation, especially in the sense that the finite soul and matter have no truth, so that God is not merely another word for that incomprehensibility, but rather its true identity. Either this identity, however, is not yet grasped immediately as God, for it does not yet have this determination, or the soul itself is seen as a general soul, in which matter exists in its truth, as a simple thought or a generality.— This soul must not, however, become fixed again, for example as the world soul, for then it is only the general substance which merely has actual truth as individuality.

§ 310

Spirit is at first this immediate submergence in nature: (a) the soul in its determination as nature; (b) as the soul is particularised, it emerges in antithesis to its lack of consciousness; (c) in the process it acquires corporeality, and thus becomes real.

(a) The Natural Determinacy of the Soul
§ 311

Spirit as the abstract soul of nature is simple, sidereal, and terrestrial life. It is the nous of the ancients, the simple, unconscious thought, which (a) as this general essence is the inner idea and would have its reality in the underlying externality of nature. But since it, as soul, is immediate substance, its existence is the particularisation of its natural being, an immediate and natural determinacy, which has its presupposed reality in the individual earth.


§ 312

The general planetary life of the nature spirit has the diversity of the earth as immediate differentiation within it; it then dissolves into particular spirits of nature, which wholly express the nature of the geographic parts of the world and constitute racial diversity.

The contrast between the earth's poles, by which the northern land is more compressed and more heavily weighted than the sea, whereas the southern hemisphere separates and disperses into widely distant peaks, introduces into the differences between continents a further modification which Treviranus (Biology, part 2) has exhibited in the case of the plants and animals.


§ 313

This diversity is transformed by the contingency of nature into particularities, which may be called local spirits, and manifests itself in outward forms of life and occupation, physical development and disposition, but even more in the inner tendency and capacity of intellectual and moral character.


§ 314

The soul, as the concept in itself in general, isolates itself as the individual subject. But this subjectivity is here considered only as the individuation of natural characteristics; it is the mode of the different temperaments, characters, physiognomies, and other dispositions of families or single individuals.


§ 315.

(b) Immediate judgment is the awakening of the individual soul, which confronts its unconscious natural life, in the first instance as one natural characteristic and condition confronts another, namely, sleep. This transitional phase of individuality connects with the earth as the general body of individuality.


§ 316

Waking is neither externally nor for us intrinsically different from sleep; rather, waking is itself the judgment of the individual soul, and thus the differentiation of itself from its undifferentiated generality. All self-conscious and rational activity of the spirit occurs in the waking state.— Sleep is an invigoration of this activity, though not in the sense of rest (the power of living action actually becomes sluggish due to the lack of its expression), but as a return from the world of specialisation, from dispersion into details where it has become rigidified, into the general essence of subjectivity, which is the substance of those specialised energies and their absolute master.


§ 317

Insofar, however, as the entire being of the individual is an awakened being, its particularisation is the natural development of an age.


§ 318

(c) Real individuality as the reflection of the soul in itself is its waking being for itself in self-contained, organic physicality. It also involves a self-feeling determined in and for itself and still identical with its corporeality, external and internal sensation.

The progress of the general soul to an individuality which is still immediate is above all the progress of the natural idea, from ideal generality to vitality, that is, organic individualism. In any case this has no further meaning than that it contains the spirit in itself and this is its individual and natural existence, which, however, exists here only in external representation. As in the previous case, therefore, what can be said more precisely about wakefulness as a specific waking of the spirit, and about the course of an age in the unique meaning of its intellectual development, must be seen as anticipated or as taken from representation.— On the natural side of this immanence of the individual spirit in its physicality falls in general the healthy and sympathetic sense of community. Belonging here, then, are not only the external feelings of the senses considered above (§ 279), but also the sensations, determined more precisely as immediately symbolic, including colours, smells, sounds, either immediately attractive or repulsive, either in a more general or in a more idiosyncratic manner. Under this rubric would also be found not only the inner sympathy of the parts of the body, but also certain mental qualities, such as the passions or the emotions. It is important to include here the line of connection by which anger and courage are felt in the breast, the blood, desire in the reproductive system, irritation, and contemplation, intellectual activity in the head, which is also considered the centre of the sensible system.


(b) The Antithesis of the Subjective Soul to Its Substance
§ 319.

The soul, which lives at first immediately in its substantial identity, is in its individuality as a negative self-relation, and the division of its subjectivity is set against its substantial life, which is incompatible with its concept. This first reflection into itself is at the same time a reflection into another; it stands at first, therefore, only in relation to its natural determination.


§ 320

The subject is (a) in an abstract and general relation to its natural life; the soul is, to be sure, the subject from this perspective, but its predicate in this general relation is still its substance, an impotent, merely formal being for itself, a sense of foreboding and dreaming of its more general natural life, the feeling of the nature spirit.

This relation rests on the dividing line of the spirit from itself as soul. Spirit as such has generality for its object as a thought entity, pure, that is, with its abstract subjectivity, identical with its selfhood, and its relationship to it is itself this thought. This certain substantiality is freedom, the pure negativity of all immediacy. Such free substantiality is already a part of pure self-consciousness and the actual spirit.

Thus the present, unfree matter is a reduction of free self-consciousness, — a disease in which the soul, which according to Plato delivers prophecies in the liver, or more definitely in the ganglia than in the brain or the belly. Spirit in this instance has sunken back into the spirit of nature.— In history this magical relation, which can occur in isolated individuals as a diseased condition, constitutes a phase of transition from substantial spirituality to self-consciousness and understanding.— Forebodings, prophecies, the many miraculous aspects of dreams, and other tendencies, somnambulism and animal magnetism: all these belong more or less to the realm of dream in general, where the spirit hovers between natural spirits and its rational reality, and produces thereby a representation of its more general connection in a larger natural sphere than the sort of consciousness which has understood and reasoned about itself. But since real generality, namely that of thought, only adheres to this consciousness, then that expansion of sympathetic life which emerges as representation is limited absolutely to a particular circle, and what this soul sees and predicts is only its particular inferiority, not that of a general essence. But this magical circle is ultimately an incantation, a form of subjugation, a dependency, because the soul is reduced from its free generality to particularity. Thus the image of humanity's primitive condition, in which nature and the spirit do not appear externally to inner intuition but with pure immediacy, becomes diminished daily, as with few aspects of the tradition, and dwindles into an ever-weaker position. It becomes an empty assumption, by which the general nature of the idea as a reasonable thought, which belongs only to the spirit in its free subjectivity, remains unobserved.


§ 321

(b) The subjective soul itself however, breaks the immediate, substantial identity of its relation with particular, natural being. Its antithesis, which is at the same time an identity, is a relation of contradiction: a condition of disruption, in which both aspects of the relation emerge in reality against each other and corporeal reality becomes the reality of the soul, or conversely, the soul constructs its own reality as corporeal.

This relation is the condition of madness in general. It should at the same time be remarked that: (1) this relation, like the magical relation, exists merely as ideal moments, as untrue relations, and thus persists only as conditions or diseases of the spirit. Precisely as everything finite persists, and, more specifically, just as the formal judgment and the formal syllogism exist without truth and apply only to the abstract moments of the objective concept, thus it has only a violent existence and is grounded in destruction, — a destruction which the understanding causes as it transforms the concrete into abstractions solely through its reality. Thus the relations which have now emerged are only the ideal moments of the spirit free in being, and still dominated by the hypothetic judgment. They are still substantially related to their substance in their self-differentiating subjectivity, and just as essentially the contradiction in this relation, their being is above all not their being, but exists rather as the being of their other.

(2) On this level of the relation the spirit is determined as a thing, and more precisely, as that which is understood as soul. To the ancients, for whom the antithesis of thought and being had not yet been as fully actualised, the soul had the more indeterminate meaning of spirituality. By contrast, in more recent metaphysics and other representations the spirit as soul has become a thing of many characteristics and powers, fixed as a spectre, or more precisely as an angel, and even decorated with a colour as a sensory entity. Metaphysics has generally held to the abstract determination of a thing, and the soul therefore has in and for itself the determinations of being, of quality and quantity, and is subordinated to the reflective categories of individual substances, causes, and so on. Here the question of the location of the soul, of the connection between this thing and the other thing, the body, has been of interest.

It is a contribution of Kant's to have weighed the metaphysics of spirit and soul as things and, what is the same, to have freed the spirit from this metaphysics and representation and to have posited the self in its place. For the spirit as thing can only be spoken of in a relation, that is, on the level of reflection, where the spirit of course loses its immediate substantiality or its subsisting universality, and determines itself as difference and as subject, although it has not yet achieved true reality.
