The Philosophical Propadeutic
The Science of Laws, Morals and Religion

Introduction
1. The object of this science is the Human Will in its relations as the Particular Will to the Universal Will: to the Will which is Lawful and Just or in accordance with Reason. As Will the Mind stands in a practical relation to itself. The practical way of acting [Verhalten], through which it brings determination into its determinateness or opposes other determinations of its own in the place of those already existing in it without its cooperation, is to be distinguished from its theoretical way of acting.

2. Consciousness, as such, is the relation of the Ego to an object; this object may be internal or external. Our Knowing contains objects, some of which we obtain a knowledge of through Sensuous Perception; others, however, have their origin in the Mind itself. The former, taken together, constitute the Sensuous World; the latter, the Intelligible World. Judicial [rechtlichen = legal], ethical and religious conceptions belong to the latter.

3. In the relation of the Ego and object to each other the Ego is (a) passive; in which case the object is regarded as the cause of the determinations in the Ego and the particular ideas [Vorstellungen] which the Ego has are attributed to the impression made upon it by the immediate objects before it. This is the Theoretical Consciousness. Whether it be in the form of perception or of imagination or of the thinking activity its content is always a given and extant something, a content having existence independent of the Ego.

On the contrary, (b) the Ego manifests itself as Practical Consciousness when its determinations are not mere ‘ideas’ and thoughts, but issue forth into external existence. In this process the Ego determines the given things or objects, so that the former is active and the latter are passive, i.e. the Ego is the cause of changes in the given objects.

4. Practical Ability [Vermögen] as such determines itself from within, i.e. through itself. The content of its determinations belongs to it and it recognizes that content for its own. These determinations, however, are at first only internal and, for this reason, separated from the external reality, but they are to become external and be realized. This is done through the [conscious] Act. By such an Act internal practical determinations receive externality: i.e. external Being. Conversely, this process may be regarded as the cancelling of an extant externality and the bringing of the same into harmony with the internal determination.

5. The internal determination of the Practical Consciousness is either Impulse [Trieb] or Will Proper [eigentlicher Wille]. Impulse is a natural self-determination which rests upon circumscribed feelings and has a limited finite end in view which it cannot transcend. In other words, it is the unfree, immediately determined. Lower Appetite [niedere Begehrungsvermögen] according to which man ranks as a creature of nature. Through Reflection he transcends Impulse and its limitations, and not only compares it with the means of its gratification but also compares these means one with another and the impulses one with another, and both of these with the object and end of his own existence. He then yields to the decision of Reflection and gratifies the Impulse or else represses it and renounces it.

6. The Will Proper, or the Higher Appetite, is (a) pure indeterminateness of the Ego, which as such has no limitation or a content which is immediately extant through nature but is indifferent towards any and every determinateness. (b) The Ego can, at the same time, pass over to a determinateness and make a choice of some one or other and then actualize it.

7. The Abstract Freedom of the Will consists in this very indeterminateness, or identity of the Ego with itself, wherein a determination occurs only in so far as the Ego makes it its own [assimilates it] or posits it within itself. And yet in this act it remains self-identical and retains the power to abstract again from each and every determination. There may be presented to the Will, from without, a great variety of incitements, motives and laws but man, in following the same, does this only in so far as the Will itself makes these its own determinations and resolves to actualize them. This, too, is the case with the determinations of the Lower Appetites, or with what proceeds from natural Impulses and Inclinations.

8. The Will has Moral Responsibility [Schuld] in so far as (a) its determination is made its own solely from its own self, or by its resolve: i.e. [in so far as] the Ego wills it, and (b) it is conscious of the determinations which are produced through its act as they lie in its resolve or are necessarily and immediately involved in its consequences.

9. A Deed [Tat] is, as such, the produced change and determination of a Being. To an Act [Handlung], however, belongs only what lay in the resolve or was in the consciousness [and] hence what the Will acknowledges as its own.

10. The free Will, as free, is moreover not limited to the determinateness and individuality through which one individual is distinguished from another but is Universal Will and the individual is, as regards his Pure Will, a Universal Being.

11. The Will can, in various ways, take up into itself external content, that is, a content which does not proceed from its own nature and make this content its own. In this the Will remains self-identical only in form. It is, namely, conscious of its power to abstract from each and every content and recover its pure form but it does not remain self-identical as regards its content and essence. In so far as it is such a Will it is really only the Will-of-Choice [Willkür] [or Arbitrariness].

12. But that the Will may be truly and absolutely free it is requisite that what it wills, or its content, be naught else than the Will itself i.e. the pure self-determination, or the act that is in harmony with itself. It is requisite that it wills only in-itself and has itself for its object. The Pure Will, therefore, does not will some special content or other on account of its speciality but in order that the Will as such may in its deed be free and be freely actualized; in other words, that the Universal Will may be done.

The more precise determination and development of these universal maxims of the [rational] Will belong to the Science of Laws, Morals and Religion.

Elucidation of the Introduction
1. Objects are particular somethings through their determinations as sensuous objects, for example, through their shape, size, weight, colour, through the more or less firm combination of its parts, through the purpose for which they are used, etc. If one, in his conception of it, takes away the determinations of an object, this process is called Abstraction. There remains after the process a less determined object: i.e. an Abstract Object. If, however, I conceive of only one of these determinations, this is called an Abstract Representation [or Abstract Idea]. The object left in its completeness of determination is called a Concrete Object. When I abstract all the determinations I have left only the conception of the absolutely Abstract Object. When one says ‘Thing’, though he may mean something quite definite, he says only something quite indefinite since our thought reduces an actual something to this abstraction of mere ‘Thing’.

Sensuous Perception is in part external, in part internal. Through external [Sensuous Perception] we perceive things which are outside us in time and space, things which we distinguish from ourselves. Through the internal Sensuous Perception we take note of the states and conditions which belong in part to our bodies and in part to our souls. One part of the Sensuous World contains such objects and their determinations, as, for example, colours, that is, objects that have a sensuous basis and have received a mental form. If I say, ‘This table is black’, I speak in the first place of this single concrete object but, secondly, the predicate ‘black’ which I affirm of it is a general [quality] which belongs not merely to this single object but to several objects. ‘Black’ is a simple idea. We cognize a real concrete object immediately. This act of immediate apprehension is called Intuition.

A general Abstract Idea is therefore a mediated Idea for the reason that I know it by means of another, i.e. by means of abstraction or the omission of other determinations which are found united in the Concrete Object. A Concrete Idea is said to be analysed when the determinations which are united in it as concrete are separated. The intelligible world receives its content from Spirit [i.e. from the activity of the Mind], and this content consists of pure universal Ideas such, for example, as Being, Nothing, Attribute, Essence, etc.

2. The first source of our knowledge is called Experience. To Experience belongs this important feature: that we ourselves have perceived it. A distinction must however, be drawn between Perception and Experience. Perception has for its object only a single something which is determined in one way this moment and in another way the next moment. If I repeat the Perception, and in the repeated perceptions take note of what remains the same and hold it fast, this operation is properly termed Experience. Experience contains, for the most part, laws: i.e. [just] such a connection of two phenomena that if one is extant, the other one must result from it in all cases. The Experience contains, however, only the mere generality of such a phenomenon and not the necessity of the connection. Experience teaches only that things are or happen thus and so but not the reasons, not the ‘why’ thereof.

Since there are a multitude of objects concerning which we can have no Experience, for example the past, we are obliged to have recourse to the Authority of others. Moreover, these objects which we hold for true upon the Authority of others are objects of Experience (i.e. empirical objects). We believe them upon the Authority of others which is probable. We often hold as probable that which is really improbable and what is improbable often turns out to be the truth. (An event receives its confirmation chiefly through its results and through the manifold circumstances connected with our experience of it. Those who narrate to us an event must be trustworthy, that is, they must have been in a position where it was possible for them to have knowledge of it. We draw conclusions from the tone and manner in which they relate the event, in regard to their degree of earnestness or the selfish purpose subserved by it. When writers, under the reign of a tyrant, are lavish in his praises, we at once pronounce them to be flatterers. But if one makes special mention of a good quality or deed of his enemy we are the more ready to believe his statements.)

Experience, therefore, teaches only how objects are constituted and not how they must be or how they ought to be. This latter knowledge comes only from a concept of the Essence or Idea of the object, a knowledge of it as a whole. And this latter knowledge alone is true knowledge. Since we must learn the grounds of an object from its Concept, a knowledge of it in its entire compass, so too, if we would learn the character of the Lawful, Moral and Religious, we must have recourse to the Concepts thereof.

In determining what is right and good we may at first hold to Experience and that too of the most external kind, namely, the way of the world. We can see there what passes for right and good or what proves itself to be right and good. Upon this phase it is to be remarked (a) that in order to know what deeds are right or good and what are wrong or wicked, one presupposes himself to be in possession of the Concept of the Right [Lawful] and Good and (b) if anyone chose to hold to that which the way of the world showed to be current as right and good he would not arrive at anything definite. All would depend upon the view with which he undertook the investigation. In the course of the world, wherein there occurs such a variety of events, each one can find his own particular view justified be it ever so peculiar.

But there is, secondly, an internal experience concerning the Right [Legal], Good and Religious. We judge upon our Sentiment [Gemüt] or Feeling [Gefühl] that a deed of this or that character is good or bad. Moreover, we have a Feeling of Religion; we are affected religiously. What Feeling says of the deed by way of approval or disapproval contains merely the immediate expression, or the mere assurance, that something is so or is not so. Feeling gives no reasons for its decision, nor does it decide with reference to reasons. What kind of Feeling we have, of approval or of disapproval, is the mere experience of a Sentiment. Feeling is, however, inconstant and changeable. It is at one time in one state and at another in a different one. Feeling is, in short, something subjective. An object of Feeling is my object as a particular individual. If I say: ‘I feel thus about it’ or ‘It is my sentiment toward it’, I then say only what belongs to me as an individual. I leave undecided whether it is also the same in other persons. When I, upon any occasion, appeal simply to my Feeling, I do not desire to enter upon the reasons [and] consequently upon universal relations. I withdraw myself within myself and express only what concerns me and not what is in-and-for-itself objective and universal. The Objective, or the universal, is the Intelligible, or the Concept [Notion].

If anyone wishes to know truly what a rose or a pink or an oak is, that is, if he wishes to grasp it in its Concept [or Idea], he must first grasp the higher Concept which lies at its base, namely that of Plant; and further, in order to grasp the Concept of the ‘plant’, one must again grasp the higher Concept whereupon the Concept of the ‘plant’ depends, and this is the Concept of an Organic Body. In order to have the representation [idea] of bodies, surfaces, lines, and points, one must have recourse to the Concept of Space, since Space is the generic thereof; hence bodies, surfaces, etc. are only particular determinations of Space. In the same manner the present, past and future presuppose Time as their generic ground. And so it is with Laws, Duties and Religion; they are merely particular determinations of Consciousness, which is their generic ground.

3. In the first stage of Consciousness we are usually aware of the object before us, that is, we are aware only of the object not of ourselves. But it is essentially in these things that the ‘I’ [Ego] exists. In so far as we think simply of an object we have a Consciousness, that is, a consciousness of the object. In so far as we think of Consciousness we are conscious of Consciousness, that is, we have a consciousness of Consciousness. In our ordinary life we have consciousness but we are not conscious that we are a Consciousness; there is much in use that is even corporeal of which we are unconscious; for example, the vital functions which minister to our self-preservation we possess without being conscious of their precise constitution, this we only acquire through Science. Also, from a spiritual standpoint, we are much more than we know. The external objects of our Consciousness are those which we distinguish from ourselves and to which we ascribe an independent existence. The inner objects, on the other hand, are determinations or faculties, [i.e.] powers of the Ego. They do not subsist in separation from one another but only in the Ego. Consciousness functions theoretically or practically.

4. Theoretical Consciousness considers that which is and leaves it as it is. Practical [Consciousness], on the other hand, is the active consciousness which does not leave what is as it is but produces changes therein and produces from itself determinations and objects. In Consciousness, therefore, two things are present: myself and the object; I am determined by the object or the object is determined by me. In the former case my relationship is theoretical [and in the latter case practical]. [In Theoretical Consciousness] I take up the determinations of the object as they are. I leave the object as it is and seek to make my ideas conform to it. I have determinations in myself and the object also has determinations within it. The content of the Idea about the object should conform to what the object is. The determinations of the object in-itself are rules for me. The truth of my Ideas consists in their correspondence with the constitution and the determinations of the object. The law for our Consciousness, in so far as it is theoretical, is that it must not be completely passive but must direct its activity to receiving the object. Something can be an object for our perception without our having on that account a consciousness of it when we do not direct our activity to it. This activity in reception is called Attention.

5. The Ideas which we acquire through Attention we excite in ourselves through the power of Imagination, whose activity consists in this: that it calls up in connection with the intuition of one object the image of another in some way or other linked with it. It is not necessary that the object, to which the Imagination links the image of another, be present; it may be present only in an idea of it. The most extensive work of the Imagination is Language. Language consists in external signs and sounds through which one makes known what he thinks, feels or senses. Language consists in Words, which are nothing else than signs of thoughts. For these signs there are again found in writing other signs called letters. They make known our thoughts without our having to speak them. Hieroglyphic writing is distinguished from the Alphabetic by its direct presentation of entire thoughts. [Translator’s Note: Though this passage was written before the Rosetta Stone was discovered and is therefore no longer valid in respect of Egyptian hieroglyphs, Hegel’s comments are still valid for other Asiatic forms of hieroglyphic writing.] In Speech a certain sound is sensuously present and therein we have the intuition of a sound. But we do not stop at this because our Imagination links to it the idea of an absent object. Here then we have two different objects, a sensuous determination and another idea linked to it. Here the idea counts solely as the essence and as the meaning of what is sensuously present which is thus a mere sign. The given content confronts a content which we have produced.

6. In ordinary life, the expressions to have an Idea and to Think [vorstellen as opposed to denken] are used interchangeably and we thus dignify with the name of thought what is only the product of imagination. In ‘Ideas’ of this sort we have an object before us in its external and unessential existence. In Thinking, on the contrary, we separate from the object its external, merely unessential side, and consider the object merely in its essence. Thinking penetrates through the external phenomenon to the internal nature of the thing and makes it its object. It leaves the contingent side of the thing out of consideration. It takes up a subject not as it is in immediate appearance, but severs the unessential from the essential and thus abstracts from it. In Intuition we have single objects before us. Thinking brings them into relation with each other or compares them. In Comparison it singles out what they have in common with each other and omits that by which they differ and thus it retains only universal ideas. The universal Idea contains less determinateness than the single object which belongs under this universal, since one arrives at the universal only by leaving out something from the single thing; on the other hand, the universal includes more under it or has a much greater extension. In so far as Thinking produces a universal object, the activity of abstracting belongs to it and hence it has the Form of the universal (as, for example, in the universal object ‘Man’.) But the content of the universal object does not belong to it as an activity of abstracting but is given to Thinking and is independent of it and present on its own account.

To Thinking there belong manifold determinations which express a connection between the manifold phenomena that is universal and necessary. The connection as it exists in Sensuous Intuition is merely an external or contingent one, which may or may not be in any particular form. A stone, for example, makes by its fall an impression upon a yielding mass. In the Sensuous Intuition is contained the fact of the falling of the stone and the fact of an impression made in the yielding mass where the stone touched it. These two phenomena, the falling of the stone and the impression on the yielding mass, have a succession in time. But this connection contains, as yet, no necessity: on the contrary it is possible, for all that is therein stated, that the one might have happened under the same conditions without the other following it. When, on the contrary, the relation of these two phenomena to each other is determined as cause and effect, or as the relation of Causality, then this connection is a necessary one or a connection of the Understanding. This entails that under the same conditions, if one happens, the other is contained in it.

These determinations are the forms of Thinking. The Mind posits them solely through its own activity but they are at the same time determinations of existing things [zugleich Bestimmungen des Seienden]. We come first by Reflection to distinguish what is Ground and Consequent, Internal and External, Essential and Unessential. The Mind is not at first conscious that it posits these determinations by its own free will, but thinks that it [Mind] expresses in them [these determinations] something which is present without its assistance.

7. Whenever we speak of the Ego or the Mind as receiving determinations we presuppose its previous indeterminateness. The determinations of the Mind always belong to the Mind even though it has received them from other objects. Although something may be in the Mind which came from without as a content not dependent upon the Mind, yet the form always belongs to the latter; e.g. although in the Imagination the material may be derived from Sensuous Intuition, the form consists in the method in which this material is combined in a different manner from that present in the original intuition. In a pure Concept, e.g. that of animal, the specific content belongs to Experience but the universal element in it is the form which comes from the Mind.

This form is thus of the Mind’s own determining. The essential difference between the theoretical and the practical functions of the Mind consists in this: that in the theoretical the form alone is determined by the Mind while, on the other hand, in the practical function the content also proceeds from the Mind. In Right, for example, the content is personal freedom. This belongs to the Mind. The practical function recognizes determinations as its own in so far as it wills them. Even if they are alien determinations, or given from without, they must cease to be alien in so far as I will them: I change the content into mine and posit it through myself.

Theoretical Activity starts from something externally present and converts it into an Idea. Practical Activity, on the other hand, starts from an internal determination. This is called resolve, intention, or direction and makes the internal actually external and gives to it existence. This transition from an internal determination to externality is called Act.

9. The Act is, in general terms, a union of the internal and external. The internal determination, from which it begins, has to be cancelled and made external as far as its form is concerned, which form is that of a mere internal. The content of this determination is still to remain [after negation of the form]; e.g. the intention to build a house is an internal determination whose form consists in this: that it is only an intention at first; the content includes the plan of the house. If the form now is here cancelled, the content will still remain. The house which is to be built according to the intention and that which is built according to the plan are the same house.

Conversely, the Act is likewise a sublation of externality as it is immediately present; e.g. the building of a house necessitates a change in a variety of ways, of the ground, the building-stone, the wood, and the other materials. The shape of the external is changed; it is brought into quite other combinations than existed before. These changes happen in conformity to a purpose, to wit, the plan of the house with which internal something the external is to be made to harmonize.

10. Animals, too, stand in a practical relation to that which is external to them. They act from instinct, with designs and purposes to realize, and thus rationally. Since they do this unconsciously, however, we cannot properly speak of them as authors of Voluntary Acts. They have Desires and Impulses, but no Rational Will. In speaking of man’s impulses and desires, it is usual to include the Will. But, more accurately speaking, the Will is to be distinguished from Desire. The Will, in distinction from Desire, is called the Higher Appetite. With animals even Instinct is to be distinguished from their impulses and desires, for though Instinct is an acting from Impulse and Desire it, however, does not terminate with its immediate externalization but has a further, and for the animal likewise necessary, result. It is an acting in which there is involved also a relation to something else; e.g. the hoarding up of grain by many animals. This is not yet quite properly to be called an Act, but it contains a design in it, namely, provision for the future.

Impulse is, in the first place, something internal, something which begins a movement from itself, or produces a change by its own power. Impulse proceeds from itself. Although it may be awakened by external circumstances, yet it existed already without regard to them; it is not produced by them. Mechanical causes produce mere external or mechanical effects which are completely determined by their causes, in which therefore nothing is contained which is not already present in the cause; e.g. if I give motion to a body, the motion imparted to it is all that it has, or if I paint a body, it has nothing else than the colour imparted to it. On the contrary, if I act upon a living creature my influence upon it becomes something quite different from what it was in me. The activity of the living creature is aroused by my act and it exhibits its own peculiarity in reacting against it.

In the second place. Impulse is (a) limited in respect to content [and] (b) is contingent as regards the aspect of its gratification, since it is dependent upon external circumstances. Impulse does not transcend its purpose [end] and is therefore spoken of as blind. It gratifies itself, let the consequences be what they may.

