The Science of Logic
preface to the first edition
The complete transformation that the ways of philosophical thought have
undergone among us in the past twenty-five odd years, the higher standpoint in self-awareness that spirit has attained in this period of time, has
so far had little influence on the shape of the logic.
What was hitherto called “metaphysics” has been, so to speak, extirpated
root and branch, and has vanished from the ranks of the sciences. Where are
the voices still to be heard of the ontology of former times, of the rational
psychology, the cosmology, or indeed, even of the natural theology of the
past, or where are they allowed to be heard? Inquiries, for instance, into
the immateriality of the soul, into mechanical and final causes – where is
interest in them still to be found? Even the former proofs of God’s existence
are cited only out of historical interest, or for the purpose of edification and
the uplifting of the mind. The fact is that interest, whether in the content
or in the form of the former metaphysics, or in both together, has been
lost. Remarkable as it is if a people has become indifferent, for instance,
to its constitutional law, to its convictions, its moral customs and virtues,
just as remarkable it is when a people loses its metaphysics – when the
spirit engaged with its pure essence no longer has any real presence in its
life.
The exoteric teaching of the Kantian philosophy – that the understanding ought not to be allowed to soar above experience, lest the cognitive faculty
become a theoretical reason that by itself would beget nothing but mental
fancies – this was the justification coming from the scientific camp for
78 
renouncing speculative thought. In support of this popular doctrine there
was added the cry of alarm of modern pedagogy, that the pressing situation
of the time called for attention to immediate needs – that just as in the
ways of knowledge experience is first, so for skill in public and private
life, exercise and practical education are the essential, they alone what is
6 required, while theoretical insight is even harmful. – With science and
common sense thus working hand in hand to cause the downfall of metaphysics, the singular spectacle came into view of a cultivated people without
metaphysics – like a temple richly ornamented in other respects but without
a holy of holies. – Theology, which in former times was the custodian of
the speculative mysteries and of the albeit subordinate metaphysics, had
relinquished this last science in exchange for feelings, popular practicality,
and erudite historiography. And it was in keeping with this change that,
for their part, those solitary individuals, whom their people had exiled
from the world and dedicated to the contemplation of the eternal, also
disappeared. Theirs was a life devoted exclusively to the service of contemplation, without practical gain but only for the sake of blessedness, and
their disappearance can be regarded as essentially the same phenomenon,
though in a different context, as the one just mentioned. – And so this
darkness, this colorless self-preoccupation of spirit bent upon itself, having been dispelled, existence shone transformed into the bright world of
flowers – of which, as is well known, none is black.
Logic did not fare quite as badly as metaphysics. That from logic one
learns how to think, which for lack of anything else was considered its
usefulness and therefore its purpose – just as if one were to learn how to
digest or to move first from the study of anatomy and physiology – this
is a prejudice that has long been put to rest, and in this respect the spirit
of practicality certainly did not intend any better fate for logic than it
did for its sister science. Nevertheless, probably for the sake of a certain
formal utility, a place was still allowed for it among the sciences; it was even
retained as a subject of public instruction. However, this better lot concerns
only the outer fate of logic, for its shape and content have remained the
same throughout a long inherited tradition, though progressively more
diluted and emaciated in the course of the transmission; no trace is so far
to be detected in it of the new spirit that has awakened in the sciences
no less than in the world of actuality. However, once the substantial form
of the spirit has reconstituted itself, it is of no avail to want to retain the
forms of an earlier culture. These are like withered leaves pushed aside by
the new buds already being generated at their roots. 9
Also in the scientific realm this ignoring of the universal change is gradually beginning to lose ground. The new ideas have imperceptibly become
the accepted currency even to those opposed to them. And if these continue
to fuss about their sources and principles and to dispute them, they have 7
nevertheless surrendered to their consequences, unable to fend off their
influence. They have no other way of giving a positive importance, and
some content, to their increasingly irrelevant negative attitude, except by
falling in with the new ways of thinking.
However, the period of fermentation that goes with the beginning of
every new creation seems to be past. In its first manifestation, a new creation usually behaves towards the entrenched systematization of the earlier
principle with fanatical hostility; in fear of losing itself in the expansion of
the particular, it also shuns the labor that goes with scientific cultivation
and, nevertheless in need of it, it grasps at first at an empty formalism. The
demand for the elaboration and cultivation of the material becomes at that
point all the more pressing. There is a period in the formation of an epoch
in which, just as in the formation of the individual, the foremost concern
is the acquisition and reinforcement of the principle in its undeveloped
intensity. But the higher demand is that such a principle should be made
into science.
Now, whatever might already have happened to the substance and form
of science in other respects,  that makes up metaphysics
proper or pure speculative philosophy has to date been much neglected.
What I more precisely understand by this science and its standpoint, I
have provisorily stated in the Introduction. The fact that it was necessary to
make a completely fresh start with this science, the nature itself of its subject
matter, and the lack of any previous work that could have been used for
the undertaken reform of it, may be taken into account by the fair-minded
critic if even a labor of many years was unable to give this effort a greater
perfection. – The essential point to be kept in mind is that an altogether
new concept of scientific procedure is at work here. As I have remarked
elsewhere,a inasmuch as philosophy is to be science, it cannot borrow its
method from a subordinate science, such as mathematics, any more than
it can remain satisfied with categorical assurances of inner intuition, or can
make use of argumentation based on external reflection. On the contrary,
it can only be the nature of the content which is responsible for movement
a Phenomenology of Spirit, Preface to the first edition. [GW 9, pp. 31, 33–36] – The actual demonstration
is the cognition of the method, such as has its place in the logic itself.10 
8 in scientific knowledge, for it is the content’s own reflection that first posits
and generates what that content is.
The understanding determines, and holds the determination fixed. Reason is negative and dialectical, since it dissolves the determinations of the
understanding into nothing; it is positive, since it generates the universal,
and comprehends the particular therein. Just as the understanding is usually taken as something separate from reason in general, so also dialectical
reason is taken as something separate from positive reason. In its truth
reason is however spirit, which is higher than both reason bound to the
understanding and understanding bound to reason. It is the negative, that
which constitutes the quality of both the dialectical reason and the understanding: it negates the simple, thereby posits the determinate difference
of the understanding; but it equally dissolves this difference, and so it is
dialectical. But spirit does not stay at the nothing of this result but is in
it rather equally positive, and thereby restores the first simplicity, but as
universal, such as it is concrete in itself; a given particular is not subsumed
under this universal but, on the contrary, it has already been determined
together with the determining of the difference and the dissolution of this
determining. This spiritual movement, which in its simplicity gives itself its
determinateness, and in this determinateness gives itself its self-equality –
this movement, which is thus the immanent development of the concept,
is the absolute method of the concept, the absolute method of cognition
and at the same time the immanent soul of the content. – On this selfconstructing path alone, I say, is philosophy capable of being objective,
demonstrative science. – In this fashion have I tried to portray consciousness in the Phenomenology of Spirit. Consciousness is spirit as concrete,
self-aware knowledge – to be sure, a knowledge bound to externality, but
the progression of this subject matter, like the development of all natural
and spiritual life, rests exclusively on the nature of the pure essentialities
that constitute the content of the logic. Consciousness, as spirit which on
the way of manifesting itself frees itself from its immediacy and external
concretion, attains to the pure knowledge that takes these same pure essentialities for its subject matter as they are in and for themselves. They are
pure thoughts, spirit that thinks its essence. Their self-movement is their
spiritual life and is that through which science constitutes itself, and of
which it is the exposition.
The connection of the science that I call Phenomenology of Spirit to
the Logic is thereby stated. – As regards the way it stands to it exter-
9 nally, a second part was intended to follow the first part of the System 11
of Scienceb that contains the Phenomenology. This second part would have
contained the Logic and both the two real sciences of philosophy, the Philosophy of Nature and the Philosophy of Spirit, and would have brought
the system of science to completion. However, the necessary expansion
which the Logic demanded by itself has led me to have this particular part
published separately. It therefore constitutes the first sequel to the Phenomenology of Spirit in an expanded plan of the system of science. I shall
later follow up with a treatment of both the two mentioned real sciences
of philosophy. – This first volume of the Logic contains the Doctrine of
Being, as Book One; Book Two, the second section of the same volume
which contains the Doctrine of Essence is already in the presses; finally, the
second volume will contain the Subjective Logic, or the Doctrine of the
Concept.
Nurnberg, March ¨ 22, 1812 10
preface to the second edition
I undertook this revision of , of which the first volume is
hereby being published, in full consciousness not only of the difficulty of its
subject matter and of its exposition besides, but equally of the imperfection
from which its treatment in the first edition suffers. As earnestly as I have
striven after many years of further occupation with this science to remedy
this imperfection, I still feel that I have cause enough to appeal to the
reader’s indulgence. One title to such appeal in the first instance may well be
based on the circumstance that for the most part only external material was
available for its content in the earlier metaphysics and logic. Although the
practice of these disciplines had been universal and customary, in the case
of logic down to our own time, its interest in their speculative side has been
just as universally and customarily restricted. It is the same material which
is repeated over and over again, whether it is thinned out to the point of
trivial superficiality, or whether the ancient ballast is freshly trotted out and
dragged to new lengths, so that, through these habitually only mechanical
efforts, no gain could be had for the philosophical content. To display
b (Bamberg and Wurzburg: at G ¨ obbard’s, ¨ 1807). This title [i.e. “First Part of the System of Science”]
will no longer be added to the second edition to be published this coming Easter. – In place of
the intended second part here mentioned, which was to contain the complement of the other
philosophical sciences, I have since brought out the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, in its
third edition last year. [1832]12 
the realm of thought philosophically, that is, in its own immanent activity
or, what is the same, in its necessary development, had to be, therefore,
a new undertaking, one that had to be started right from the beginning.
Nevertheless, the received material, the known thought-forms, must be
regarded as an extremely important fund, even a necessary condition, a
presupposition to be gratefully acknowledged even though what it offers
here and there is only a bare thread, the dead bones of a skeleton thrown
together in a disorderly heap.
The forms of thought are first set out and stored in human language,
and one can hardly be reminded often enough nowadays that thought is
what differentiates the human being from the beast. In everything that
the human being has interiorized, in everything that in some way or other
has become for him a representation, in whatever he has made his own,
there has language penetrated, and everything that he transforms into
language and expresses in it contains a category, whether concealed, mixed,
or well defined. So much is logic natural to the human being, is indeed
his very nature. If we however contrast nature as such, as the realm of the
11 physical, with the realm of the spiritual, then we must say that logic is the
supernatural element that permeates all his natural behavior, his ways of
sensing, intuiting, desiring, his needs and impulses; and it thereby makes
them into something truly human, even though only formally human –
makes them into representations and purposes. It is to the advantage
of a language when it possesses a wealth of logical expressions, that is,
distinctive expressions specifically set aside for thought determinations.
Many of the prepositions and articles already pertain to relations based on
thought (in this the Chinese language has apparently not advanced that
far culturally, or at least not far enough), but such particles play a totally
subordinate role, only slightly more independent than that of prefixes
and suffixes, inflections, and the like. Much more important is that in a
language the categories should be expressed as substantives and verbs, and
thus be stamped into objective form. In this respect, the German language
has many advantages over other modern languages, for many of its words
also have the further peculiarity of carrying, not just different meanings,
but opposite ones, and in this one cannot fail to recognize the language’s
speculative spirit. It can delight thought to come across such words, and
to discover in na¨ive form, already in the lexicon as one word of opposite
meanings, that union of opposites which is the result of speculation but
to the understanding is nonsensical. Philosophy, therefore, stands in no
need of special terminology; true, some words are to be taken from foreign
languages; yet, through use these have already acquired citizenship in it and 13
an affected purism would be all the more out of place where everything
depends on meaning the most. – The advance of culture in general and
of the sciences in particular, even the empirical sciences which are bound
to the senses and generally operate in the medium of the most common
categories (e.g. whole and parts, a thing and its properties, and the like),
gradually fosters the rise of thought-relations that are also more advanced,
or it at least raises them to wider universality and consequently brings them
to greater notice. In Physics, for instance, where the predominant category
previously was that of force, it is the category of polarity that now plays the
most significant role – a category which, incidentally, is randomly being
imposed all too often on everything, even on light. It defines a difference in
which the different terms are inseparably bound together, and it is indeed
of infinite importance that an advance has thereby been made beyond the
abstractive form of identity, by which a determinateness such as for example
that of force acquires independent status, and the determining form of
difference, the difference that at the same time remains an inseparable
moment of identity, is instead brought to the forefront and is given general
acceptance. The study of nature, because of the stable reality of its objects,
is inevitably led to fix categories that can no longer be ignored in it, even if 12
with complete disregard for consistency towards other categories which are
also allowed to stand; it is not given room for abstracting from opposition
and moving on to generalities, as so easily happens when spirit is the object.
But even when logical matters and their expressions are common coin
in a culture, still, as I have said elsewhere,1 what is familiar is for that reason
not known, and it can even be a source of irritation to have to occupy
oneself with the familiar – and what could be more familiar than just those
determinations of thought which we employ everywhere, and are on our
lips in every sentence that we utter? To indicate the general features of
the course that cognition goes through as it leaves familiar acquaintance
behind, the essential moments in the relationship of scientific thought to
this natural thought, this is the purpose of the present preface. Together
with the earlier Introduction, it will suffice for a general idea of what is
meant by logical cognition – the kind of general idea which is demanded
of a science prior to the science itself.
First of all, it must be regarded as an infinite step forward that the forms
of thought have been freed from the material in which they are submerged
in self-conscious intuition, in representation, as well as in our desires and
volitions or, more accurately, in ideational desiring and willing (and there
1 In the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit, GW 9, 26.14 
is no human desire or volition without ideation); a step forward that these
universalities have been brought to light and made the subject of study on
their own, as was done by Plato, and after him by Aristotle especially; this
step marks the beginning of our knowledge of them. “Only after almost
everything which is necessary to life, and pertains to its comfort and
sociability, was made available,” says Aristotle, “did man begin to trouble
himself with philosophical knowledge.”