PART ONE
ANTHROPOLOGICAL DIDACTIC
ON THE ART OF KNOWING THE INTERIOR AS WELL AS THE EXTERIOR OF MAN
7
 9
First Book
On the Cognitive Faculty
On Being Conscious of One's Self
[127] § 1. The fact that man is aware of an ego-concept raises him infinitely above all other creatures living on earth. Because of this, he is a person; and by virtue of this oneness
of consciousness, he remains one and the same person despite all the vicissitudes which may befall him. He is a being who, by reason of his preeminence and dignity, is wholly
different from things, such as the irrational animals whom he can master and rule at will. He enjoys this superiority even when he cannot yet give utterance to his ego, although it
is already present in his thought, just as all languages must think it when they speak in the first person, even if the language lacks a specific word to refer to this ego-concept. This
faculty (to think) is understanding.
It is noteworthy, however, that the child who already speaks fairly well begins to use the pronoun I rather late (perhaps after a year), in the meantime speaking of himself in the
third person ("Carl wants to eat, go, . . ." etc.). A light seems to dawn upon him when he begins speaking in the first person. From that day on he will never again revert to the
third person. At first the child merely felt himself, now he thinks himself. The explanation of this phenomenon might be rather difficult for the anthropologist.9
 10
The observation that a child does neither weep nor smile until after it is three months old appears to be based on the development of certain notions of offense and injustice, 1
which point toward reason. In this period, when his eyes [128] begin to follow bright objects which are held before him, we have the crude beginnings of a process of broadening
perceptions (the apprehensions of sensory awareness) into a recognition of objects of the senses, that is, of experience.
When the child tries to talk, his mangling of words makes him so lovable to mother and nurse, and makes both of them so well-disposed that they hug and kiss him continually.2
They also thoroughly spoil the little tyrant by catering to his every wish and desire. That the little creature is lovable in the period of the development of his human nature must be
credited to his innocence and the candor of his still stumbling utterances which are free from guilt or deceit. Yet the child's charm must also be credited to the natural inclination
of nurses to care for a creature that flatteringly submits itself completely to the will of someone else. The child does so because he knows that a playtime, the best time of all, will
be granted, and in this way the teacher, who now becomes a child again, enjoys once more the pleasures of childhood.3
The teacher's memory of his own childhood does, however, not reach back to that time, since the time of early childhood is not a time of experiences but rather a time of mere
sporadic perceptions which have not yet been unified by any real concept of an object.4
On Egoism
§ 2. From the day that man begins to speak in the first person, he brings his beloved self to light wherever he can, and his egoism advances unrestrained. If he does not do so
openly (for then the egoism of others may oppose him), his egoism expresses itself
10
 11
covertly and with 5 seeming self-abnegation and pretended modesty in order to ensure for himself a superior value in the judgment of others.
Egoism may be thought of as containing three presumptions: that of reason, that of taste, and that of practical interest, that is, it may be logical, aesthetic, or practical.
The logical egoist considers it unnecessary to test his judgment by the reason of others, as if he had no need of a touchstone (criterium veritatis externum).6 However, it is so
certain that we cannot dispense with this means of ensuring ourselves of the truth of our judgment, that this is perhaps the most important reason why learned people insist so
emphatically on the freedom of writing. If this freedom [129] is denied, we are deprived of an effective means of testing the correctness of our judgment, and we expose ourselves
to error. It should not even be said that a mathematician is privileged to make judgments on his own authority, for if the perceived and verified agreement between the judgments
of one geometer and those of all others who devote themselves with talent and industry to the same subject did not prevail, then even mathematics would not be free from having
somewhere7 fallen into error. There are also8 certain cases where we do not trust solely in the judgment of our own senses, where we find it necessary to inquire of other people if
they seem9 to have had the same impression as ours, for example, whether the ringing of a bell was real or only in our ears. And although, when philosophizing, we are not even
permitted to appeal to the judgments of others for establishing our own (as the jurists do in appealing to those well-versed in law), every writer who finds that no one agrees with
his clearly expressed and important views is suspected by the public10 of being in error.
Therefore, it is a risk to hold a view which conflicts with public opinion, even if it is deemed to be reasonable. Such a display of egoism is called paradoxical.
11
 12
Boldness does not lie in running the risk that the view is untrue, but rather in the risk that the view might be accepted by only a few. Preference for the paradoxical is logical
obstinacy in which a man does not want to be an imitator of others, but rather prefers to appear as an unusual 11 human being. Instead of accomplishing his purpose, such a man
frequently succeeds only in being odd. But, because everyone must have and maintain his own intelligence (Si omnes patres sic, at ego non sic.Abailard),12 the reproach of being
paradoxical, when it is not based on vanity or the desire to be different, carries no bad connotations. Opposite to the paradoxical is the commonplace, which sides with the general
opinion. But with the commonplace there is as little safety, if not less, because it lulls the mind to sleep, whereas the paradox awakens the mind to attention and investigation,
which often lead to discoveries.
The aesthetic egoist is satisfied with his own taste, even though others may dislike, criticize, or even ridicule his verse, his painting, or his music. He deprives himself of the
progress toward improvement when he isolates himself [130] and his own judgment; he applauds himself, and he seeks art's touchstone of beauty only in himself.
Finally, the moral egoist limits all purposes to himself; as a eudaemonist, he concentrates the highest motives of his will merely on profit and his own happiness, but not on theconcept of duty. Because every other person has a different concept of what he counts as happiness, it is exactly egoism which causes him to have no touchstone of a genuine
concept of duty which13 truly must be a universally valid principle. All eudaemonists are consequently egoists.
Egoism can only be contrasted with pluralism, which is a frame of mind in which the self, instead of being enwrapped in itself as if it were the whole world, understands and
behaves itself as a mere citizen of the world. The above is all that belongs to anthropology. The con12
 13
sideration of the contrast between egoism and pluralism from a metaphysical perspective lies beyond the scope of the science with which we are dealing here. If the question were
only whether I, as a thinking being, have any reason to assume that beside my existence there exists a totality of other beings (called the world) with whom I am in relation, then it
is not an anthropological but merely a metaphysical question.
Note On the Formality of Egoistic Language
The language used by the head of state, when speaking of himself to the people, is nowadays in the plural (We, King by the Grace of God . . .). The question arises whether the
meaning of this is not rather egoistic, that is, indicative of the speaker's own authority; the same meaning is expressed by the King of Spain when he refers to himself as Io, el Rey
(I, the King). It appears to be a fact, however, that such formality in speaking about the highest authority was originally to indicate condescension (We, the King and his Counsel,
or Estates). But how does it happen that the reciprocal form of address, which was formerly expressed in the old classical languages by the familiar Thou 14 in the singular, should
later be indicated by the formal You in the plural15 when spoken by various (chiefly German) peoples? For the sake of giving greater distinction to the person addressed, the
German [131] language uses two distinctive expressions, namely he and they16 (as if it were not a form of address at all, but a story about someone17 absent, be it one person or
more18). This has finally led, to complete the absurdity, to the use of such expressions as Your Grace, Right Honorable, Right Noble, High-and-Noble, in which the speaker,
rather than pretending to humble himself before the person addressed, shows deference instead to the abstract quality of his station. Probably all this is the result of feudalism
which saw to it that19 the degree of respect due the socially more distinguished not be vio13
 14
lated in a hierarchy extending from the royal dignity down through all the stages until even human dignity itself ceases and only man remains, that is, down to 20 the position of
serfdom, where a man is addressed by his superiors as you,21 or down to the position of a child who is not allowed to have its own way.
On Being Arbitrarily Conscious of One's Ideas
§ 3. The effort to become conscious of one's sense impressions [ideas] is22 either the perception (attentio) or the abstraction (abstractio) of a sense impression of which I am
conscious within myself. Abstraction is not just a neglect and cessation of perception (since that would be distraction [distractio]), but rather it is a considered act of the faculty of
cognition; it is a sense impression of which I am inwardly conscious, keeping it separate from other sense impressions in my consciousness. Therefore, one does not speak of
abstracting (separating) something, but of abstracting from something, that is, abstracting a definition from the object of my sense impression, whereby the definition preserves the
universality of a concept, and is thus taken into the understanding.
For a man to be able to make an abstraction from a sense impression, even when the sense impression forces itself on his senses, is proof of a far greater faculty than just paying
attention, because it gives evidence of a freedom of the faculty of thought and sovereignty of the mind in having the condition of one's sense impressions under one's control
(animus sui compos). In this respect the faculty of abstraction is much more difficult, but also more important than the faculty of perception when it encounters sense impressions.
Many people are unhappy because they cannot en14
 15
gage in abstraction. Many a suitor could make a good marriage if he could only shut his eyes to a wart [132] on his sweetheart's face or to a gap where teeth are missing. But it is
a peculiarly bad habit of our faculty of perception to observe too closely, even involuntarily, what is faulty in other people. Likewise, it is bad manners to fix one's eyes on the
spot where a button is missing from the coat of a man who is directly in front of us, or upon a missing-tooth gap, or to call attention to a habitual speech defect, or to make the
other person feel uneasy by staring at him and thus ruining any possibility of personal relations with him. If the essentials are good, it is not only fair but wise to shut one's eyes to
the shortcomings of others, as well as to our own good fortune. The capacity to abstract, however, is a power of mind 23 which can only be acquired by exercising it.24On Self-Observation
§ 4. Noticing (animadvertere) oneself is not the same thing as observing (observare) oneself. Observation is a methodical compilation of perceptions which we have experienced.
Such perceptions furnish material for the diary of an observer of the self25 and they may easily lead to wild imaginings and insanity.
The perception (attentio) of oneself when dealing with others is necessary, but it must not be obvious in daily intercourse; if it is noticeable, it makes conversation awkward (a
hindrance) or affected (a mockery). The opposite of both is a free and easy manner (air dégagé), the self-confidence that one's behavior is not going to be criticized unfavorably
by others. He who pretends to judge himself as if he were standing in front of a mirror, and he who speaks as if he heard himself speak (and not simply as if someone else heard
him), is a kind of actor. He wishes to appear as someone, and so he feigns a semblance of his own person. However, on this account,
15
 16
he suffers in the estimation of other persons who perceive his attempt because it arouses the suspicion that he intends to deceive. Candid behavior (a manner which causes no such
suspicion) is called natural behavior (although it does not exclude all fine art and the cultivation of taste). 26 Such behavior pleases because of its simple truth in expression. But
when sincerity appears to proceed from simplicity, that is, because a mode of perception has been neglected which has already been established as a rule, then simplicity is called
naïveté.
[133] The naïve27 manner of revealing one's self as evidenced when a girl is approached by a man for the first time, or when a peasant, unfamiliar with urbane manners, entering
the city for the first time, provokes, because of the person's innocence and simplicity (caused by the lack of the art of pretense), a benevolent smile from those who are already
well versed and adept in this art. Such a smile is not a condemnation, since honesty and sincerity are still respected; it is a good-natured and kindly ridicule at inexperience based
on the evil art of pretense, indicative of our already corrupted human nature. It is an art which should be lamented rather than ridiculed, especially if one compared it with the idea
of a still uncorrupted human nature.* It is a momentary joy, as when a cloudy sky breaks open for an instant and lets a sunbeam through, only to close up at once as if to avoid
hurting the purblind eyes of egoism.
But the real purpose of this section is the previous warning against engaging in deliberate observation and studied compilation of an inner history of the involuntary course of our
thoughts and feelings. The warning is given because deliberate observation is the most direct path to illuminism and terrorism in the confused belief that we are open to higher
inspiration and, without our help, who
* In reference to this, the familiar verse of Persius can be parodied as follows: Naturam videant ingemiscantque relicta. [That they may look on Nature, and sigh because
they have lost herEd.]
16
 17
knows why, are subject to unknown interior 28 forces. In such a situation, without noticing it, we make pretended discoveries of what we ourselves have introduced into our own
minds, like a Bourignon, with flattery, or a Pascal, 29 with terrifying and frightful implications, 30 or as was the case with Albrecht Hailer,31 an otherwise splendid mind, who
while writing the extensive and much-interrupted diary of his spiritual life, finally came to the point of asking a famous theologian, his former academic colleague Doctor Less,32
whether in his extensive store of divine learning he could not find any consolation for his anguished soul.
To scrutinize the various acts of the imagination within me, when I call them forth, is indeed worth reflection, as well as necessary and useful for logic and metaphysics. But to
wish to play the spy upon one's self, when those acts come to mind unsummoned and of their own accord (which happens through the play [134] of the unpremeditatedly creative
imagination), is to reverse the natural order of the cognitive powers, since then the rational elements do not take the lead (as they should) but instead follow behind. This desire for
self-investigation is either already a disease of the mind (hypochondria), or will lead to such a disease and ultimately to the madhouse. He who has a great deal to tell of inner
experiences (for example, of grace, of temptations, etc.) may, in the course of his voyage to self-discovery, have made his first landing only at Anticyra.33 Inner experiences are
not like external experiences of objects in space, wherein the objects appear34 side by side and permanently fixed. The inner sense sees the conditions for its definition only in
Time and, consequently, in a state of flux, which is without that permanence of observation necessary for experience.*
* If we consciously imagine for ourselves the inner action (spontaneity), whereby a concept (a thought) becomes possible, we engage in reflection; if we consciously
imagine for ourselves the susceptibility (receptivity), whereby a perception (perceptio), i.e., empirical observation, becomes possi-
(footnote continued on the next page)
17 18
[135] On the Ideas We Have without Being Aware of Them
§ 5. To have ideas and still not to be conscious of them seems to be a contradiction; for how can we know that we have them unless we are conscious of them? This objection has
already been raised by Locke, 35 who on that account rejected the existence of such a type of ideas. Nevertheless, we can be indirectly conscious of having an idea, although we
are not directly conscious of it. Such ideas are called obscure,36 the others are clear, and when their clarity extends to the components of the whole idea and their combination,
then they are called distinct ideas either of thought or of perception.
Whenever I am conscious of seeing a person in the distant meadow, though I am not aware of seeing his eyes, nose, mouth, and so forth, then I really only conclude that this thing
is a person. If I were to say that I did not have any idea at all of these perceptions (simply because I was not conscious of perceiving these and other
(footnote continued from the previous page)
ble, we engage in apprehension; however, if we consciously imagine both acts, then consciousness of one's self (apperceptio) can be divided into that of reflection and that of
apprehension. Reflection is a consciousness of the understanding, while apprehension is a consciousness of the inner sense; reflection is pure apperception, and apprehension
is empirical apperception; consequently, the former is falsely referred to as the inner sense. In psychology we investigate ourselves according to our perceptions of the inner
sense; but in logic we make the investigation on the grounds of what the intellectual consciousness supplies us with. Here the self appears to us as twofold (which would be
contradictory): (1) the self, as the subject of thinking (in logic), which means pure apperception (the merely reflecting self) of which nothing more can be said, except that it is
an entirely simple perception. (2) The self, as the object of the perception, consequently also part of the inner sense, contains a multiplicity of definitions which make inner
experience possible.
To ask whether or not a man conscious of different inner mental changes (either of his thoughts or of fundamental principles assumed by him) can say that he is the selfsame
man, is an absurd question. For he can be conscious of these changes in the first place only on condition that he represents himself, in the different situations, as one and the
same subject. The human ego is indeed twofold as regards its form (manner of representation), but not with respect to its matter (content).
18
 19
parts of the person), then I would not be able to say that I saw a person. It is these partial ideas that contribute to the entirety of the head or of the person.
Sense perceptions and sensations of which we are not aware but whose existence we can undoubtedly infer, that is, obscure ideas in both man and animals, constitute an
immeasurable field. The clear ideas, on the other hand, contain infinitely few instances of sense perceptions and sensations which reveal themselves to consciousness. It is as if
just a few places on the vast map of our mind were illuminated. This can inspire wonder at our own being; for a higher power would need only cry, ''Let there be light" and then,
without further action (if, for instance, we take an author and find out all that he has stored in his mind), there would be laid open before the eyes half a universe. Everything that
the eye reveals when strengthened by the telescope (perhaps directed toward the moon) or by the microscope (directed upon infusoria) is perceived by the naked eye, for these
optical instruments 37 do not bring more rays of light and subsequently more pictures into [136] the eye. The pictures reflect themselves upon the retina without such ingenious
instruments. They simply enlarge the images so that we become conscious of them. The same thing is true of the sensation of hearing, when the musician plays a phantasy on the
organ with his ten fingers and two feet, while at the same time he is speaking to someone standing beside him. Within a few seconds a host of ideas is awakened in his soul, and
every idea requires special judgment as to its appropriateness, since a single stroke of the finger, not fitted to the harmony, would immediately be heard as a discord. Yet the
whole comes out so well that the improvisator must often wish to have preserved in a score many a passage which he has performed in this happy fashion, but which he could not
have performed so well with real diligence and attention.
Because obscure ideas can only be perceived by man passively as a play of sensations, their theory does not
19
 20
belong to pragmatic anthropology but to physiological anthropology with which we are not properly concerned. 38
We often play with obscure ideas, and we have an interest in removing objects that are liked or disliked by the imagination. But still more often we ourselves become an object of
obscure ideas, and our understanding is unable to rescue itself from absurdities which were caused by those ideas, although we recognize them as an illusion.
Such is the case with sexual love where no benevolence is intended but only the enjoyment of its object. How much cleverness has been wasted in throwing a delicate veil over
man's desires,39 but revealing still enough of man's close relation to the animal kingdom so that bashfulness results. Blunt expressions are replaced by euphemisms in polite
society even though they are transparent enough to inspire a smile. Here the imagination may well walk in obscurity, and it requires an uncommon skill if, in order to avoidcynicism, one does not risk falling into absurd purism.
On the other hand, we are often enough the victims of obscure ideas which are reluctant to vanish even when understanding [137] has thrown light upon them. To arrange for his
grave in his garden or under a shady tree, in a field or in a dry plot of ground, is often a very important affair to a dying man, even though he knows that if he chooses the one, he
has no reason to hope for a nice view; and if he chooses the other, he has no reason to worry about catching a cold.
The saying, "Clothes make the man," holds true in a certain measure even for an intelligent man. The Russian proverb says: "One receives a guest according to his clothes, and
accompanies him according to his understanding. But understanding cannot prevent the obscure impression that a well-dressed person is a person of a certain importance, but the
preliminary judgment may be revised later.
20
 21
Even studied obscurity is often used purposely to reflect profundity and thoroughness in much the same way as objects seen at dusk or in a fog always appear to be larger than
they actually are.* Skotison (make it obscure) is the catchword 40 of all mystics in order to lure with fictitious obscurity those who dig for the hidden treasures of wisdom.41 But
generally the reader welcomes a certain degree of mystery in a manuscript, because he thereby becomes aware of his own intellectual power in resolving the obscure into clear
thoughts.42
On Distinctness and Indistinctness in Relation to the Consciousness of One's Ideas
§ 6. The awareness of one's ideas, sufficient for distinguishing one object from another, is [138] clearness.43 Awareness which makes the composition of ideas clear is called
distinctness. Distinctness alone makes it possible for an aggregate of ideas to become cognition, whereby order is established from manifold ideas, because every conscious
combination presupposes a unity of awareness which in turn supplies the rule for the unity. One cannot contrast clear ideas with confused ones (perceptio confusa); rather, they
must be contrasted with the indistinct (mere clara) ideas. Whatever is con-
* But in looking at an object in daylight, it is apparent that what seems lighter than surrounding objects also seems larger, e.g., white stockings display fuller calves than
black ones. A fire in the night, burning on a high mountain, appears to be larger than one actually finds it to be upon inspection. Perhaps we can also explain in this way
the apparently larger size of the moon [MS and Cassirer; B: the apparent size of the moonEd.] as well as the apparently greater distance between stars close to the horizon.
In both cases shining objects appear to us as being high in the sky. They are objects close to the horizon seen through an obscuring layer of air; and what is dark is judged
smaller because of the light which surrounds it. In target practice, therefore, a dark target with a white circle in the center would be more advantageous for shooting than a
white target with a dark center.
21
 22
fused must be compounded, for within the simple there is neither order nor confusion. Confusion is the cause of indistinctness, not its definition. In every complex idea (perceptio
complexa), and thus in every cognition (which requires both perception and concept), we see that distinctness depends upon the order according to which contributory ideas are
combined (merely considering form) which order gives rise either to a logical division into primary or secondary (perceptio primaria et secundana) ideas or a real division into
principal and accessory ideas (perceptio principalis et adhaerens). Distinct cognition results from order. One can see that if the faculty of cognition is to be called understanding
(in the most general sense of the word), it must contain the faculty of apprehending (attentio) given ideas in order to produce perception; furthermore, it must contain the power of
separating what is common to more than one object (abstractio); in order to produce the concept, it also must contain the faculty of deliberation (reflexio), in order to produce
cognition of an object.
We say that he who possesses these powers to a superior degree has a head; and he who has a small measure of these faculties is called a simpleton, because he always allows
himself to be guided by other persons. But we call him a genius who makes use of originality and produces out of himself what must ordinarily be learned under the guidance of
others.
He who has learned nothing of what must be taught in order to be knowledgeable is called an ignoramus, if he has been expected to know because of his claim to be a man of
learning. Without such a claim he may still be a genius. He who cannot think for himself, though he can learn much, is limited (warped). One can be a person of vast learning (a
machine for the instruction of others, teaching what one has once been taught) and still be limited in reference to the rational [139] use of his actual knowledge. The pedant is the
one whose conversation on what he has learned betrays academic constraint
22
 23and consequently a lack of independent thought. This is so whether he is a scholar, a soldier, or even a courtier. Of all kinds of pedants the most tolerable is the learned pedant,
because we can still learn from him. On the other hand, in a courtier scrupulousness in formalities (pedantries) is not merely useless, but, in view of the pride inevitably exhibited
by the pedant, also ridiculous since it is the pride of an ignoramus.
The art, or rather the skill, of speaking in the socially proper tone, and appearing up-to-date, especially when the conversation is about science, is falsely called popularity, but
should rather be called polished superficiality because it frequently cloaks the paltriness of a narrow-minded person. Only children can be fooled by this. Addison had the Quaker
say to the constantly talking officer who was traveling with him in the coach: "Thy drum is a symbol of thee, it soundeth because it is empty." 44
In order to judge men according to their cognitive faculty (according to their understanding as such) we make a division into two classes: those to whom must be attributed
common sense (sensus communis), which certainly is not common (sensus vulgaris), and men of science. People with common sense are familiar with the principles relating to
practical application (in concreto).45 Scientific people are familiar with the principles themselves prior to their application (in abstracto). The understanding, which belongs to the
first cognitive capacity, is sometimes called horse sense (bon sens), 46 whereas the understanding belonging to the second cognitive faculty we call perspicuity (ingenium
perspicax). It is noteworthy that we interpret horse sense, which is generally considered only as practical cognition, not just as an understanding which can exist without
cultivation, but rather as an understanding to which cultivation can be a hindrance if it is not conscientiously followed through. Some praise this understanding fanatically and
represent47 it as a storehouse of treasures hidden in the depths of the mind.
23
 24
Sometimes we even interpret the dictum of horse sense as an oracle (the genius of Socrates) which is more accurate than anything that erudite wisdom has to offer. So much is
certain, that, whenever the answer to a question rests upon general and innate rules of the understanding (the possession of which is called native intelligence), we may be sure
that seeking for studied and artifically established principles [140] (school learning), and forming a conclusion accordingly, is less reliable than gradually coming to a conclusion
from the grounds of judgment which lie in the dark recesses of the mind. This may be called logical tact, in which reflection looks at the object from many angles and produces
the correct result without being aware of the acts occurring within the mind during this process. 48
Horse sense, however, can demonstrate this superiority only with regard to an object of experience. In this way it not only grows in knowledge but even extends experience itself;
not, however, in a speculative, but only in an empirico-practical respect. For in the speculative employment of understanding, scientific principles a priori are required, while in
the empirico-practical49 employment of understanding it is possible to have experiences, that is, judgments, which are continually confirmed by experiment and result.
On Sensibility in Contrast to Understanding50
§ 7. With respect to the state of its ideas, my mind is either active, and shows a capacity (facultas) for accomplishment, or it is passive, and continues in a receptive capacity
(receptivitas). Cognition contains a union of both states of ideas. The possibility of having such a cognition bears the name of cognitive faculty, a term derived from its most
important part,
24
 25
namely, the activity of the mind in combining or separating ideas.
Ideas with respect to which the mind is passive, and by which the subject is therefore affected (whether it affects itself or is affected by an object), belong to the sensual cognitive
faculty. But ideas which involve a pure activity (that is, thinking) belong to the intellectual cognitive faculty. The first is called the lower; the other, the higher cognitive faculty.
51* The sensual cognition has the character [141] of passivity toward the inner sense of awareness, while intellectual cognition has the character of spontaneity52 of apperception,
that is, of the pure consciousness of the act which constitutes thought and appertains to logic (a system of the rules of the understanding). Passivity, in turn, belongs to the field of
psychology (a summary of all inner perceptions under the laws of nature). Psychology is the foundation of inner experience.
Remark
The object of an idea, which comprises only the manner in which I am affected by the object, can be recognized by me only as it appears to me. All experience (empirical
cognition), the inner not less than the outer, is nothing but the cognition of objects as they appear to us, not as they are (when considered by themselves). Not
* To posit sensibility only in the obscurity of ideas, and intellectuality in distinctness, and thereby merely positing a formal (logical) distinction of cognition instead of a
real (psychological) distinction, which not only refers to the form, but also to the content of thinking, has been a great mistake of the Leibniz-Wolff school. The error
consisted in attributing a deficiency (as to clarity and constituent ideas) to sensibility and thus associating it with indistinctness, whereas the nature of rational ideas was
understood to be distinct on the grounds that sensibility is something very positive and an indispensable ingredient of rational ideas for the process of producing cognition.Leibniz is really the one to blame. As a Platonist, he posited innate, pure perceptions of understanding, called ideas, which are encountered, though only obscurely, in the
human mind. By applying our intellectual awareness to the analysis and elucidation of Platonic ideas, we are said to arrive at the cognition of objects as they really are.
25
 26
only the quality of the idea, but also the quality of the subject and its susceptibility is important in determining the kind of sensual perception on which the thought process
concerning the object (the concept of the object) bases itself. The formal character of this receptivity cannot be borrowed from the senses; it must be given a priori, that is, it must
be a sense perception which remains after everything empirical (the content of sense perception) is taken away; in inner experiences, this formal factor of intuition is Time. 53
Experience is empirical cognition, but cognition (dependent as it is on judgments) requires reflection (reflexio), and consequently consciousness of activity54 in arranging the
multitude of ideas according to a rule of unity,55 that is, a concept; and, finally, it requires thought as such (which makes it different from sense perception). On this account
consciousness is divided into the discursive (which, being logical, must take the lead because it provides the rule) and intuitive consciousness. Discursive consciousness (the pure
apperception of its mental activity) is simple. The "I" of reflection contains no manifold within itself, and is always one and the same in every judgment, because it contains
merely the formal part of consciousness. On the other hand, inner experience contains the material of itself as well as a manifold of the [142] empirical, inner perception, that is,
the "I" of apprehension (hence an empirical apperception).
I, as a thinking being and as a being endowed with senses, am one and the same subject.56 However, as an object of inner empirical intuition, so far as I am inwardly affected by
temporal sensations (simultaneous or successive), I cognize myself only as I appear to myself, not as a thing-in-itself.57 Such cognition depends on a temporal condition which is
no concept of the understanding (hence not mere spontaneity), and hence is a condition in regard to which my faculty of ideas is passive. It is a condition that belongs to
receptivity. Therefore, through inner experience I always know myself only as I appear to
26
 27
myself. This axiom has frequently been distorted to read: It only seems to me (mihi videri) that I have definite ideas and sensations, and that, indeed, I only appear to exist. This
illusion is the basis of erroneous judgment emanating from subjective causes falsely treated as objective. Appearance, however, is no judgment, but merely empirical intuition
which, through reflection and concept of the understanding resulting therefrom, becomes inner experience and consequently truth.
The cause of these errors lies in the fact that the terms inner sense and apperception are generally considered synonymous by psychologists, although inner sense should designate
only psychological (applied) consciousness, while apperception should designate logical (pure) consciousness. From this it is evident that the only perception we have of ourselves
by means of the inner sense is of how we appear to ourselves, because apprehension (apprehensio) of impressions of the inner sense presupposes a formal condition of the inner
perception of a subject. The condition is Time, which certainly is not a concept of the understanding. It is merely a subjective condition by which inner sensations are given to us
in consequence of the nature of the human soul. Thus it is not without our power to know what an object is in itself.
This note does not really belong to anthropology. In anthropology, experiences are appearances united according to the laws (rules) of the understanding, and no question is asked
concerning the manner of representing things as they are apart from their relation to the senses 58 (as [143] they are in themselves). This investigation belongs to metaphysics
which has to do with the possibility of knowledge a priori. Nevertheless, it was necessary to go back as far as we did just to avoid the mistakes of the speculative mind with regard
to this question. On the whole, knowledge of man through inner experience, according to which he judges others, is of great importance and perhaps even more difficult to achieve
than the
27
 28
ability to judge others correctly, in that the one who investigates his inner consciousness easily carries many things into his own self-consciousness instead of simply observing
what is there. On this account it is advisable and even necessary to begin with observed phenomena within oneself before proceeding to make exact statements concerning man's
nature, that is, before proceeding to the study of inner experience.
Apology for Sensibility
§ 8. Understanding is highly esteemed by everyone. Its very definition as the higher cognitive faculty only goes to show that whoever ventures to praise it would be sent away with
the same ridicule earned by an orator praising virtue: Stulte! quis unquam vituperavit. 59 Sensibility, on the other hand, is in bad repute. We say uncomplimentary things, such as
(1) that it confuses the power of imagination; (2) that it boasts, and is like a sovereign mistress, stubborn and hard to subdue, whereas it ought to be only the handmaid of the
understanding; (3) that it is even deceptive, so that we cannot be sufficiently on our guard where it is concerned.60 Yet sensibility is not without praise, especially among poetsand people of good taste. They highly esteem the figurative representation of ideas not only as a gain, but because in this way concepts need not be analyzed into their constituent
parts with painstaking care to express the full meaning of a thought or the emphasis (the force) of speech and the self-evidence (the clarity in consciousness) of sensibility. They
declare that understanding without adornment is a deficiency.* We
* Since we are speaking here only of the cognitive faculty, and, therefore, of ideas (not of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure), sensibility will mean nothing more than
sense perception (empirical perception [MS: sense-perceptionEd.]) in distinction to concepts (pertaining to thoughts) as well as pure perception (pertaining to the
perception of Space and Time).
28
 29
do not need panegyrists here, but only someone to act as a defender of sensibility against the accuser.
[114] The passive element in sensibility, which we cannot ignore, is really the cause of all the difficulties we ascribe to it. The inner perfection of man consists in having the power
to use all his faculties, a power to subject their use to his own free volition. For this, it is necessary that the understanding should rule without weakening sensibility (which in
itself is like a mob of people since it does not think) because without sensibility no material would be provided for the use of the law-giving understanding.
Justification of Sensibility Against the First Indictment
§ 9. The senses do not confuse. We cannot say of a person who grasps, but has not yet ordered, a given manifold, that he confuses it. Perceptions of the senses (empirical ideas
with consciousness) can only be called inner phenomena. Only the understanding, which joins perceptions and combines them under a rule of thought, by introducing order into
the manifold, establishes them as empirical cognition, that is, experience. The understanding is, therefore, neglecting its duty if it judges rashly, without having arranged sense
impressions according to concepts, and then later complains of their state of confusion, which it blames on man's sensual nature. This reproach applies equally to the unfounded
complaint concerning the confusion of outer as well as inner perceptions through sensibility.
Sense perceptions certainly precede perceptions of the understanding and display themselves en masse. Yet the harvest [Ertrag] is more abundant when the understanding with its
order and intellectual form is added.