                                      1790

                           THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT

                                by Immanuel Kant

                       translated by James Creed Meredith
PREFACE

            PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 1790.

  The faculty of knowledge from a priori principles may be called pure
reason, and the general investigation into its possibility and
bounds the Critique of Pure Reason. This is permissible although "pure
reason," as was the case with the same use of terms in our first work,
is only intended to denote reason in its theoretical employment, and
although there is no desire to bring under review its faculty as
practical reason and its special principles as such. That Critique is,
then, an investigation addressed simply to our faculty of knowing
things a priori. Hence it makes our cognitive faculties its sole
concern, to the exclusion of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure
and the faculty of desire; and among the cognitive faculties it
confines its attention to understanding and its a priori principles,
to the exclusion of judgement and reason, (faculties that also
belong to theoretical cognition,) because it turns out in the sequel
that there is no cognitive faculty other than understanding capable of
affording constitutive a priori principles of knowledge. Accordingly
the critique which sifts these faculties one and all, so as to try the
possible claims of each of the other faculties to a share in the clear
possession of knowledge from roots of its own, retains nothing but
what understanding prescribes a priori as a law for nature as the
complex of phenomena-the form of these being similarly furnished a
priori. All other pure concepts it relegates to the rank of ideas,*
which for our faculty of theoretical cognition are transcendent;
though they are not without their use nor redundant, but discharge
certain functions as regulative principles.** For these concepts serve
partly to restrain the officious pretentions of understanding,
which, presuming on its ability to supply a priori the conditions of
the possibility of all things which it is capable of knowing,
behaves as if it had thus determined these bounds as those of the
possibility of all things generally, and partly also to lead
understanding, in its study of nature, according to a principle of
completeness, unattainable as this remains for it, and so to promote
the ultimate aim of all knowledge.

  *[The word is defined in SS 17 & SS 57 Remark I. See Critique of
Pure Reason, "Of the Conceptions of Pure Reason" - Section 1 & 2:
"I understand by idea a necessary conception of reason, to which no
corresponding object can be discovered in the world of sense."
(Ibid., Section 2.) "They contain a certain perfection, attainable
by no possible empirical cognition; and they give to reason a
systematic unity, to which the unity of experience attempts to
approximate, but can never completely attain." (Ibid., "Ideal of
Pure Reason").

  **[Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, Appendix.]

  Properly, therefore, it was understanding which, so far as it
contains constitutive a priori cognitive principles, has its special
realm, and one, moreover, in our faculty of knowledge that the
Critique, called in a general way that of pure reason was intended
to establish in secure but particular possession against all other
competitors. In the same way reason, which contains constitutive a
priori principles solely in respect of the faculty of desire, gets its
holding assigned to it by The Critique of Practical Reason.

  But now comes judgement, which in the order of our cognitive
faculties forms a middle term between understanding and reason. Has it
also got independent a priori principles? If so, are they
constitutive, or are they merely regulative, thus indicating no
special realm? And do they give a rule a priori to the feeling of
pleasure and displeasure, as the middle term between the faculties
of cognition and desire, just as understanding prescribes laws a
priori for the former and reason for the latter? This is the topic
to which the present Critique is devoted.

  A critique of pure reason, i.e., of our faculty of judging on a
priori principles, would be incomplete if the critical examination
of judgement, which is a faculty of knowledge, and as such lays
claim to independent principles, were not dealt with separately.
Still, however, its principles cannot, in a system of pure philosophy,
form a separate constituent part intermediate between the
theoretical and practical divisions, but may when needful be annexed
to one or other as occasion requires. For if such a system is some day
worked out under the general name of metaphysic-and its full and
complete execution is both possible and of the utmost importance for
the employment of reason in all departments of its activity-the
critical examination of the ground for this edifice must have been
previously carried down to the very depths of the foundations of the
faculty of principles independent of experience, lest in some
quarter it might give way, and sinking, inevitably bring with it the
ruin of all.

  We may readily gather, however, from the nature of the faculty of
judgement (whose correct employment is so necessary and universally
requisite that it is just this faculty that is intended when we
speak of sound understanding) that the discovery of a peculiar
principle belonging to it-and some such it must contain in itself a
priori, for otherwise it would not be a cognitive faculty the
distinctive character of which is obvious to the most commonplace
criticism-must be a task involving considerable difficulties. For this
principle is one which must not be derived from a priori concepts,
seeing that these are the property of understanding, and judgement
is only directed to their application. It has, therefore, itself to
furnish a concept, and one from which, properly, we get no cognition
of a thing, but which it can itself employ as a rule only-but not as
an objective rule to which it can adapt its judgement, because, for
that, another faculty of judgement would again be required to enable
us to decide whether the case was one for the application of the
rule or not.

  It is chiefly in those estimates that are called aesthetic, and
which relate to the beautiful and sublime, whether of nature or of
art, that one meets with the above difficulty about a principle (be it
subjective or objective). And yet the critical search for a
principle of judgement in their case is the most important item in a
critique of this faculty. For, although they do not of themselves
contribute a whit to the knowledge of things, they still belong wholly
to the faculty of knowledge, and evidence an immediate bearing of this
faculty upon the feeling of pleasure or displeasure according to
some a priori principle, and do so without confusing this principle
with what is capable of being a determining ground of the faculty of
desire, for the latter has its principles a priori in concepts of
reason. Logical estimates of nature, however, stand on a different
footing. They deal with cases in which experience presents a
conformity to law in things, which the understanding's general concept
of the sensible is no longer adequate to render intelligible or
explicable, and in which judgement may have recourse to itself for a
principle of the reference of the natural thing to the unknowable
supersensible and, indeed, must employ some such principle, though
with a regard only to itself and the knowledge of nature. For in these
cases the application of such an a priori principle for the
cognition of what is in the world is both possible and necessary,
and withal opens out prospects which are profitable for practical
reason. But here there is no immediate reference to the feeling of
pleasure or displeasure. But this is precisely the riddle in the
principle of judgement that necessitates a separate division for
this faculty in the critique-for there was nothing to prevent the
formation of logical estimates according to concepts (from which no
immediate conclusion can ever be drawn to the feeling of pleasure or
displeasure) having been treated, with a critical statement of its
limitations, in an appendage to the theoretical part of philosophy.

  The present investigation of taste, as a faculty of aesthetic
judgement, not being undertaken with a view to the formation or
culture of taste (which will pursue its course in the future, as in
the past, independently of such inquiries), but being merely
directed to its transcendental aspects, I feel assured of its
indulgent criticism in respect of any shortcomings on that score.
But in all that is relevant to the transcendental aspect it must be
prepared to stand the test of the most rigorous examination. Yet
even here I venture to hope that the difficulty of unravelling a
problem so involved in its nature may serve as an excuse for a certain
amount of hardly avoidable obscurity in its solution, provided that
the accuracy of our statement of the principle is proved with all
requisite clearness. I admit that the mode of deriving the phenomena
of judgement from that principle has not all the lucidity that is
rightly demanded elsewhere, where the subject is cognition by
concepts, and that I believe I have in fact attained in the second
part of this work.

  With this, then, I bring my entire critical undertaking to a
close. I shall hasten to the doctrinal part, in order, as far as
possible, to snatch from my advancing years what time may yet be
favourable to the task. It is obvious that no separate division of
doctrine is reserved for the faculty of judgement, seeing that, with
judgement, critique takes the place of theory; but, following the
division of philosophy into theoretical and practical, and of pure
philosophy in the same way, the whole ground will be covered by the
metaphysics of nature and of morals.

INTRO

                         INTRODUCTION.

                  I. Division of Philosophy.

  Philosophy may be said to contain the principles of the rational
cognition that concepts afford us of things (not merely, as with
logic, the principles of the form of thought in general irrespective
of the objects), and, thus interpreted, the course, usually adopted,
of dividing it into theoretical and practical is perfectly sound.
But this makes imperative a specific distinction on the part of the
concepts by which the principles of this rational cognition get
their object assigned to them, for if the concepts are not distinct
they fail to justify a division, which always presupposes that the
principles belonging to the rational cognition of the several parts of
the science in question are themselves mutually exclusive.

  Now there are but two kinds of concepts, and these yield a
corresponding number of distinct principles of the possibility of
their objects. The concepts referred to are those of nature and that
of freedom. By the first of these, a theoretical cognition from a
priori principles becomes possible. In respect of such cognition,
however, the second, by its very concept, imports no more than a
negative principle (that of simple antithesis), while for the
determination of the will, on the other hand, it establishes
fundamental principles which enlarge the scope of its activity, and
which on that account are called practical. Hence the division of
philosophy falls properly into two parts, quite distinct in their
principles-a theoretical, as philosophy of nature, and a practical, as
philosophy of morals (for this is what the practical legislation of
reason by the concept of freedom is called). Hitherto, however, in the
application of these expressions to the division of the different
principles, and with them to the division of philosophy, a gross
misuse of the terms has prevailed; for what is practical according
to concepts of nature bas been taken as identical with what is
practical according to the concept of freedom, with the result that
a division has been made under these heads of theoretical and
practical, by which, in effect, there has been no division at all
(seeing that both parts might have similar principles).

  The will-for this is what is said-is the faculty of desire and, as
such, is just one of the many natural causes in the world, the one,
namely, which acts by concepts; and whatever is represented as
possible (or necessary) through the efficacy of will is called
practically possible (or necessary): the intention being to
distinguish its possibility (or necessity) from the physical
possibility or necessity of an effect the causality of whose cause
is not determined to its production by concepts (but rather, as with
lifeless matter, by mechanism, and, as with the lower animals, by
instinct). Now, the question in respect of the practical faculty:
whether, that is to say, the concept, by which the causality of the
will gets its rule, is a concept of nature or of freedom, is here left
quite open.

  The latter distinction, however, is essential. For, let the
concept determining the causality be a concept of nature, and then the
principles are technically-practical; but, let it be a concept of
freedom, and they are morally-practical. Now, in the division of a
rational science the difference between objects that require different
principles for their cognition is the difference on which everything
turns. Hence technically-practical principles belong to theoretical
philosophy (natural science), whereas those morally-practical alone
form the second part, that is, practical philosophy (ethical science).

  All technically-practical rules (i.e., those of art and skill
generally, or even of prudence, as a skill in exercising an
influence over men and their wills) must, so far as their principles
rest upon concepts, be reckoned only as corollaries to theoretical
philosophy. For they only touch the possibility of things according to
concepts of nature, and this embraces, not alone the means
discoverable in nature for the purpose, but even the will itself (as a
faculty of desire, and consequently a natural faculty), so far as it
is determinable on these rules by natural motives. Still these
practical rules are not called laws (like physical laws), but only
precepts. This is due to the fact that the will does not stand
simply under the natural concept, but also under the concept of
freedom. In the latter connection its principles are called laws,
and these principles, with the addition of what follows them, alone
constitute the second at practical part of philosophy.

  The solution of the problems of pure geometry is not allocated to
a special part of that science, nor does the art of land-surveying
merit the name of practical, in contradistinction to pure, as a second
part of the general science of geometry, and with equally little, or
perhaps less, right can the mechanical or chemical art of experiment
or of observation be ranked as a practical part of the science of
nature, or, in fine, domestic, agricultural, or political economy, the
art of social intercourse, the principles of dietetics, or even
general instruction as to the attainment of happiness, or as much as
the control of the inclinations or the restraining of the affections
with a view thereto, be denominated practical philosophy-not to
mention forming these latter in a second part of philosophy in
general. For, between them all, the above contain nothing more than
rules of skill, which are thus only technically practical-the skill
being directed to producing an effect which is possible according to
natural concepts of causes and effects. As these concepts belong to
theoretical philosophy, they are subject to those precepts as mere
corollaries of theoretical philosophy (i.e., as corollaries of natural
science), and so cannot claim any place in any special philosophy
called practical. On the other hand, the morally practical precepts,
which are founded entirely on the concept of freedom, to the
complete exclusion of grounds taken from nature for the
determination of the will, form quite a special kind of precepts.
These, too, like the rules obeyed by nature, are, without
qualification, called laws-though they do not, like the latter, rest
on sensible conditions, but upon a supersensible principle-and they
must needs have a separate part of philosophy allotted to them as
their own, corresponding to the theoretical part, and termed practical
philosophy capable

  Hence it is evident that a complex of practical precepts furnished
by philosophy does not form a special part of philosophy,
co-ordinate with the theoretical, by reason of its precepts being
practical-for that they might be, notwithstanding that their
principles were derived wholly from the theoretical knowledge of
nature (as technically-practical rules). But an adequate reason only
exists where their principle, being in no way borrowed from the
concept of nature, which is always sensibly conditioned, rests
consequently on the supersensible, which the concept of freedom
alone makes cognizable by means of its formal laws, and where,
therefore, they are morally-practical, i. e., not merely precepts
and its and rules in this or that interest, but laws independent of
all antecedent reference to ends or aims.

            II. The Realm of Philosophy in General.

  The employment of our faculty of cognition from principles, and with
it philosophy, is coextensive with the applicability of a priori
concepts.

  Now a division of the complex of all the objects to which those
concepts are referred for the purpose, where possible, of compassing
their knowledge, may be made according to the varied competence or
incompetence of our faculty in that connection.

  Concepts, so far as they are referred to objects apart from the
question of whether knowledge of them is possible or not, have their
field, which is determined simply by the relation in which their
object stands to our faculty of cognition in general. The part of this
field in which knowledge is possible for us is a territory
(territorium) for these concepts and the requisite cognitive
faculty. The part of the territory over which they exercise
legislative authority is the realm (ditio) of these concepts, and
their appropriate cognitive faculty. Empirical concepts have,
therefore, their territory, doubtless, in nature as the complex of all
sensible objects, but they have no realm (only a dwelling-place,
domicilium), for, although they are formed according to law, they
are not themselves legislative, but the rules founded on them are
empirical and, consequently, contingent.

  Our entire faculty of cognition has two realms, that of natural
concepts and that of the concept of freedom, for through both it
prescribes laws a priori. In accordance with this distinction, then,
philosophy is divisible into theoretical and practical. But the
territory upon which its realm is established, and over which it
exercises its legislative authority, is still always confined to the
complex of the objects of all possible experience, taken as no more
than mere phenomena, for otherwise legislation by the understanding in
respect of them is unthinkable.

  The function of prescribing laws by means of concepts of nature is
discharged by understanding and is theoretical. That of prescribing
laws by means of the concept of freedom is discharged by reason and is
merely practical. It is only in the practical sphere that reason can
prescribe laws; in respect of theoretical knowledge (of nature) it can
only (as by the understanding advised in the law) deduce from given
logical consequences, which still always remain restricted to
nature. But we cannot reverse this and say that where rules are
practical reason is then and there legislative, since the rules
might be technically practical.

  Understanding and reason, therefore, have two distinct jurisdictions
over one and the same territory of experience. But neither can
interfere with the other. For the concept of freedom just as little
disturbs the legislation of nature, as the concept of nature
influences legislation through the concept of freedom. That it is
possible for us at least to think without contradiction of both
these jurisdictions, and their appropriate faculties, as co-existing
in the same subject, was shown by the Critique of Pure Reason, since
it disposed of the objections on the other side by detecting their
dialectical illusion.

  Still, how does it happen that these two different realms do not
form one realm, seeing that, while they do not limit each other in
their legislation, they continually do so in their effects in the
sensible world? The explanation lies in the fact that the concept of
nature represents its objects in intuition doubtless, yet not as
things in-themselves, but as mere phenomena, whereas the concept of
freedom represents in its object what is no doubt a thing-in-itself,
but it does not make it intuitable, and further that neither the one
nor the other is capable, therefore, of furnishing a theoretical
cognition of its object (or even of the thinking subject) as a
thing-in-itself, or, as this would be, of the supersensible idea of
which has certainly to be introduced as the basis of the possibility
of all those objects of experience, although it cannot itself ever
be elevated or extended into a cognition.

  Our entire cognitive faculty is, therefore, presented with an
unbounded, but, also, inaccessible field-the field of the
supersensible-in which we seek in vain for a territory, and on
which, therefore, we can have no realm for theoretical cognition, be
it for concepts of understanding or of reason. This field we must
indeed occupy with ideas in the interest as well of the theoretical as
the practical employment of reason, but, in connection with the laws
arising from the concept of freedom, we cannot procure for these ideas
any but practical reality, which, accordingly, fails to advance our
theoretical cognition one step towards the supersensible.

  Albeit, then, between the realm of the natural concept, as the
sensible, and the realm of the concept of freedom, as the
supersensible, there is a great gulf fixed, so that it is not possible
to pass from the to the latter (by means of the theoretical employment
of reason), just as if they were so many separate worlds, the first of
which is powerless to exercise influence on the second: still the
latter is meant to influence the former-that is to say, the concept of
freedom is meant to actualize in the sensible world the end proposed
by its laws; and nature must consequently also be capable of being
regarded in such a way that in the conformity to law of its form it at
least harmonizes with the possibility of the ends to be effectuated in
it according to the laws of freedom. There must, therefore, be a
ground of the unity of the supersensible that lies at the basis of
nature, with what the concept of freedom contains in a practical
way, and although the concept of this ground neither theoretically nor
practically attains to a knowledge of it, and so has no peculiar realm
of its own, still it renders possible the transition from the mode
of thought according to the principles of the one to that according to
the principles of the other.

       III. The Critique of Judgement as a means of

           connecting the two Parts of Philosophy

                       in a whole.

  The critique which deals with what our cognitive faculties are
capable of yielding a priori has properly speaking no realm in respect
of objects; for it is not a doctrine, its sole business being to
investigate whether, having regard to the general bearings of our
faculties, a doctrine is possible by their means, and if so, how.
Its field extends to all their pretentions, with a view to confining
them within their legitimate bounds. But what is shut out of the
division of philosophy may still be admitted as a principal part
into the general critique of our faculty of pure cognition, in the
event, namely, of its containing principles which are not in
themselves available either for theoretical or practical employment.

  Concepts of nature contain the ground of all theoretical cognition a
priori and rest, as we saw, upon the legislative authority of
understanding. The concept of freedom contains the ground of all
sensuously unconditioned practical precepts a priori, and rests upon
that of reason. Both faculties, therefore, besides their application
in point of logical form to principles of whatever origin, have, in
addition, their own peculiar jurisdiction in the matter of their
content, and so, there being no further (a priori) jurisdiction
above them, the division of philosophy into theoretical and
practical is justified.

  But there is still further in the family of our higher cognitive
faculties a middle term between understanding and reason. This is
judgement, of which we may reasonably presume by analogy that it may
likewise contain, if not a special authority to prescribe laws,
still a principle peculiar to itself upon which laws are sought,
although one merely subjective a priori. This principle, even if it
has no field of objects appropriate to it as its realm, may still have
some territory or other with a certain character, for which just
this very principle alone may be valid.

  But in addition to the above considerations there is yet (to judge
by analogy) a further ground, upon which judgement may be brought into
line with another arrangement of our powers of representation, and one
that appears to be of even greater importance than that of its kinship
with the family of cognitive faculties. For all faculties of the soul,
or capacities, are reducible to three, which do not admit of any
further derivation from a common ground: the faculty of knowledge, the
feeling of pleasure or displeasure, and the faculty of desire.* For
the faculty of cognition understanding alone is legislative, if (as
must be the case where it is considered on its own account free of
confusion with the faculty of desire) this faculty, as that of
theoretical cognition, is referred to nature, in respect of which
alone (as phenomenon) it is possible for us to prescribe laws by means
of a priori concepts of nature, which are properly pure concepts of
understanding. For the faculty of desire, as a higher faculty
operating under the concept of freedom, only reason (in which alone
this concept has a place) prescribes laws a priori. Now between the
faculties of knowledge and desire stands the feeling of pleasure, just
as judgement is intermediate between understanding and reason. Hence
we may, provisionally at least, assume that judgement likewise
contains an a priori principle of its own, and that, since pleasure or
displeasure is necessarily combined with the faculty of desire (be
it antecedent to its principle, as with the lower desires, or, as with
the higher, only supervening upon its determination by the moral law),
it will effect a transition from the faculty of pure knowledge,
i.e., from the realm of concepts of nature, to that of the concept
of freedom, just as i its logical employment it makes possible the
transition from understanding to reason.

  *Where one has reason to suppose that a relation subsists between
concepts that are used as empirical principles and the faculty of pure
cognition a priori, it is worth while attempting, in consideration
of this connection, to give them a transcendental definition-a
definition, that is, by pure categories, so far as these by themselves
adequately indicate the distinction of the concept in question from
others. This course follows that of the mathematician, who leaves
the empirical data of his problem indeterminate, and only brings their
relation in pure synthesis under the concepts of pure arithmetic,
and thus generalizes his solution.-I have been taken to task for
adopting a similar procedure and fault had been found with my
definition of the faculty of desire as a faculty which by means of its
representations is the cause of the cause of the actuality of the
objects of those representations: for mere wishes would still be
desires, and yet in their case every one is ready to abandon all claim
to being able by means of them alone to call their object into
existence. -But this proves no more than the presence of desires in
man by which he is in contradiction with himself. For in such a case
he seeks the production of the object by means of his representation
alone, without any hope of its being effectual, since he is
conscious that his mechanical powers (if I may so call those which are
not psychological), which would have to be determined by that
representation, are either unequal to the task of realizing the object
(by the intervention of means, therefore) or else are addressed to
what is quite impossible, as, for example, to undo the past (O mihi
praeteritos, etc.) or, to be able to annihilate the interval that,
with intolerable delay, divides us from the wished for moment. -Now,
conscious as we are in such fantastic desires of the inefficiency of
our representations (or even of their futility), as causes of their
objects, there is still involved in every wish a reference of the same
as cause, and therefore the representation of its causality, and
this is especially discernible where the wish, as longing, is an
affection. For such affections, since they dilate the heart and render
it inert and thus exhaust its powers, show that a strain is kept on
being exerted and re-exerted on these powers by the representations,
but that the mind is allowed continually to relapse and get languid
upon recognition of the impossibility before it. Even prayers for
the aversion of great, and, so far as we can see, inevitable evils,
and many superstitious means for attaining ends impossible of
attainment by natural means, prove the causal reference of
representations to their objects-a causality which not even the
consciousness of inefficiency for producing the effect can deter
from straining towards it. But why our nature should be furnished with
a propensity to consciously vain desires is a teleological problem
of anthropology. It would seem that were we not to be determined to
the exertion of our power before we had assured ourselves of the
efficiency of our faculty for producing an object, our power would
remain to a large extent unused. For as a rule we only first learn
to know our powers by making trial of them. This deceit of vain
desires is therefore only the result of a beneficent disposition in
our nature.

  Hence, despite the fact of philosophy being only divisible into
two principal parts, the theoretical and the practical, and despite
the fact of all that we may have to say of the special principles of
judgement having to be assigned to its theoretical part, i.e., to
rational cognition according to concepts of nature: still the Critique
of Pure Reason, which must settle this whole question before the above
system is taken in hand, so as to substantiate its possibility,
consists of three parts: the Critique of pure understanding, of pure
judgement, and of pure reason, which faculties are called pure on
the ground of their being legislative a priori.

    