Introduction to the doctrine of reason
according to the thoughts of Professor Kant
All our cognitions are acquired
1. through experience
2. through our own practice and
3. through instruction.
From learning arises the spirit of imitation." This learning happens in
childhood. There is of course a certain skill that one brings about for
oneself through imitation; but he who imitates shows the least degree of
capacity.
The first origin of our cognitions* is empirical. Many things arise
through imitation and many cognitions through imitation/
We see what others have shown us and we imitate.
The 2nd kind is the practice of our acquired skill. Through frequent
employment"* of our insights and talents we attain a greater cognition and
new insights, and these can be increased still further by means of our own
experience.
The last thing is to attain a cognition through universal rules[;] these
are derived from reason.
The first method of attaining cognitions must be abandoned just as
soon as the capacities achieve a faculty of cultivating' themselves. One
must seek to think for oneself, to judge for oneself.
This kind of practice with our capacities demands the very same degree, even if one thinks in opposition to what others have thought.
The natural understanding has its own laws, according to which alone it
can proceed. These are called natural laws.
Besides natural laws there are also precepts for the artificial7 understanding. The first is to proceed completely without laws, and to make use
"Nachahmung."
"Kenntniße."
"Imitation."
"Ausübungen."
"excoliren."
"gekünstelten."I M M A N U E L KANT
neither of natural [lawsp nor of precepts. If, next, one wants to cultivate
17 one's own reason, one first makes use of the natural laws of reason. This
happens when one thinks often, or through practice or frequent attempts,
when one considers an object according to both particular and universal
laws.
The 2nd use of the understanding takes place according to artificial''
rules, or according to precepts, and from this arises the artificial understanding.
One only learns to walk by first being led[;] so too does one learn to
think by first of all imitating[;] after that one begins to use his feet himself
and alone. Thus we begin to judge for ourselves and to use our understanding through frequent and repeated attempts to judge for ourselves.
The merely natural laws are cultivated by means of experience, but for
the artificial use I have to have other rules. One must first imitate[,] then
practice by oneself, and finally one acquires precepts.
Through imitation we can acquire crafts, but through precepts a science. Versification can be compared, as it were, with crafts.
We learn to judge finely' by rules, but to write poetry finely' through
frequent practice.
All cognition takes place according to rules: These are either merely
natural or artificial.
Natural rules concern the common and healthy understanding and
healthy reason.
The artificial rules are the rules of learnedness. We acquire their first
use not by imitation but by frequent use of our reasonf;] the common
understanding is thereby cultivated.
The common use of the understanding is that with objects of experience.
The artificial [use] is that according to precepts and rules.
People talk much now about the healthy understanding^] they prize it
too highly. Some have believed that healthy reason differs from the sciences merely in degree. But this gives no distinct boundary where one
stops and the other begins. Healthy reason and learnedness are distinct
not merely in degree but also in species[;] there are 2 particular sources of
18 each kind.
A learned man is one whose learnedness is not grounded on common
experience. According to the common mode of speech, understanding is
called a common understanding insofar as it is found in most in the same
degree.
It is a healthy understanding, however, when it is correct. It is not
healthy by degrees; rather, correctness is when the understanding and
* Ak, "Natürlichen Gesetze"; MS, "Natürlichen" (KI, Ixvi).
* "künstlichen."
' "Schön zu urtheilen."
; "schön zudichten."
reason judge according to laws that agree with experience. But when there
are no other prindpia besides experience^]* then a healthy reason still
remains a common reason. There is also an instructed understanding,
which could not have been acquired through common experience; and
this is a science. There is a logica of the common understanding and of ;
healthy reason and a logica of learnedness. It serves to enrich the common
and healthy understanding, and to cultivate this healthy reason for
learnedness.
The logica of healthy reason will have one's own experience as its
principium and thus be empirical; it will not contain the rules for how we
ought to think but rather will indicate the rules according to which we
commonly think. There are 2 sorts of rules[:] A.) the rules according to
which one proceeds[;] these are laws of appearance, and subjective^1
These subjective laws are the laws of reason, according to which it commonly proceeds in judging and thinking. B.) Objeaive laws, according to
which the understanding ought to proceed. These are called dogmata^.
Subjective laws bring about errors. One extends healthy reason by
attending to the rules according to which the understanding ought to
proceed.
We extend objective laws through doctrines, but to cultivate healthy
reason one need not give any universal rules or precepts; learned reason is
not grounded on empirical prindpia.
Common understanding is the understanding for judging according to
laws of experience; common reason, however, [is] reason by which we
infer according to the laws of experience. This reason is called common,
then, because it is the least degree, with all objects that come before us.
On the occasion of experience we always have a measuring stick by which
we compare sizes with one another. We proceed thus when we want to
find the average size; we take that, namely, of which we want to find the 19
average size, e.g., man[;] we reckon every man's size according to the
measuring stick, add these together, divide it by the number of men whom
we have ever"1 seen in our lives[;] from this the average size then emerges,
which is adequate for every man. Thus too is the average size of the
understanding elicited from the understanding with which one is acquainted through common experience. The common understanding is
the measure. The common and healthy understanding is a small but
correct understanding, and its cognition has great usefulness. In an area
of farmers there are not nearly as many errors as in a district of learned
men that is just as large. For the farmer always goes by the guiding thread
of experience^] he judges about little, but judges correctly about that
* Ak, "sind."; MS, "sind" (KI, Ixvi).
' Ak,"Suhjeaiv"; MS, "Subjectiv" (KI, Ixvi).
* Reading "jemahls" for "niemahls," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
little. The employment of common and healthy reason is also easy[;] all
cognition from experience has more life, more that is intuitive, than that
which has arisen from universal concepts. The first advantage of common
reason is simplicity. The 2nd is correctness. The 3rd usefulness. The 4th ease
and the 5th clarity and liveliness. For cognitions arise with the light with
which empirical representations are endowed. Accordingly, healthy reason will suffice for belles lettres."
Taste really requires no learnedness at all to be quite perfect. In fact,
learned taste is false, spoiled taste.
What is beautiful must please universally and please everyone. For
passing judgment on beauty, experience is required, and the judgment of
the beautiful and the ugly is made in consequence of common and healthy
reason. Common and healthy reason lies at the basis of all learnedness; it
becomes ridiculous if it is not grafted onto this stem. In history we do not
need common understanding^] so is it, too, with many mathematical
propositions. But in the philosophical and all other sciences, where mere
imitation of another understanding is not sufficient, but rather the spirit of
genius itself is necessary, the common understanding is indispensable.
The use of all the cognitions of the learned, and their application, is
20 possible only through healthy reason. Someone can be a learned man
without a healthy understanding, to be sure, but this is a ridiculous pedant.
All learnedness is either historical or rational. Cognition which is derived
from common reason as regards its form, but from common experience as
regards its matter, is historical.Historical learnedness includeshistory, geography, etc. A historically learned man can also make reflections, but these
belong then to rational learnedness. The matter in rational learnedness can
also be grasped by common reason and experience. But the form is wholly
different. Men find more amusement in the faculty of being able to give
themselves a pleasure than in the pleasure itself. When I draw" the particular from the universal I need understanding, but when I infer the universal
from particular cases, then I need another method. The understanding
cognizes'everything a priori, healthy reason a posteriori. We have cognitions that are empirical, since we ascend from below, and in rational ones
we descend from above. The logic that is an organon of rational learnedness does not concern historical but rational cognitions. The logic that is an
organon can prescribe rules to a learnedness that is already present, and
then it is called logica critica, or it can prescribe rules through which one
can achieve learnedness, and then it is called logica dogmatica[.} All
logics are not dogmatic but critical. Philosophy involves more genius than
imitation.
The whole of nature moves according to rules[;] thus water moves
* "schönen Wissenschaften."
' "abziehe."
according to hydraulic rules, nature operates according to rules, even
inconstant weather has its certain rules, although we may not notice them.
Animals move according to rules of which they often are not at all conscious. Man acts according to rules and in particular makes use of the
understanding according to certain propositions and rules. How often do
men act according to rules, too, without being conscious of them? E.g.,
they speak their mother tongue. Employment of our powers often occurs
without our being conscious of it, and this is (i.) because this already lies
in our nature. (2.) It often occurs by imitation, by means of an example
which we imitate, in order gradually to make use of our understanding as
we see that others make use of it. (3.) One's own use. Our own practice 21
brings us to the skill to use the understanding without being conscious of
its rules.
As man learns to walk, so does he also learn to think. This understanding thus educated^1 [is called] sens commun.q When it is correct it is called
the healthy understanding, because the skill of using it is subjected to a
common use. The frequent use of our understanding among the objects
of experience finally makes us fit to use it correctly. It can become correct,
then, through mere practice and use. The healthy understanding should
be common[;] hence the understanding that goes further than its senses
teach it in experience is not commonf;] that would be the learned use of
the understanding. The healthy understanding is concerned with experience, then; it must proceed according to rules of which it is itself not
conscious/ Thus it is not undisciplined[;] it is only that it does not know
these rules in abstracto but rather in concreto. Some occupations involve
a healthy, alert understanding, then.
The causes of things do not strike the senses as much as their effects do.
Hence one must also be acquainted with the rules according to which one
can use the healthy understanding. In many cases one cannot rely on his
own practice; but the only instructor of the common understanding is
experience. First of all, then, the healthy understandingand healthy reason
are greatly needed, then, to provide a basis for all abstract higher cognitions[;] we commonly oppose healthy reason to the affected learnedness of
proud erudition. But this will not do, for learnedness always presupposes
the healthy understanding, [as] art does nature. They are distinctae, to be
sure, but not oppositae. It has become the fashion, however, to praise the
healthy understanding to the detriment of the honor of the sciences. It is of
course no criticism if one says that someone lacks science, but if someone
does not have a healthy understanding he is a natural minor, a child. At the
least, then, we demand of everyone healthy understanding.
"gebildete."
Ak, "Sens commun; MS, "Sens commun" (KI, Ixvi).
Reading "nicht selbst bewußt" for "selbst bewußt," with Hinske (KI, Ixxiii).
There are certain average types of perfectionsf;] e.g., the beauty of a
woman is, as it were, a merit, ugliness offends, but tolerable looks are an
average thing, which one expects of people, as it were. People are distinguished by beauty and ugliness in particular. So is it too with people's size.
22 Our eyes form a certain idea of the average, and what is extraordinary,
people in most cases agree on this. Thus one speaks, e.g., of a man's
wealth. The average between riches and povertywe call being well-off \\ In
all our concepts, then, we make the average a measuring stick. So too is
the healthy understanding the average among people's capacities. Healthy
reason is not supposed to go a step further than experience leads it. The
healthy understanding does not cognize or judge in abstracto but in
concreto[;] it draws its judgments from experience. However it can also
cognize universally[,] a priori[,] and in abstracto much that experience
teaches us. The healthy understanding is thus the faculty of judging
correctly in concreto. Often quite reasonable people cannot judge at all in
abstracto, since just as often they think in concreto. So it is in moral cases,
e.g., by means of an example in a case one cognizes things in concreto. The
understanding that can judge in abstracto is called the more refined, scientific understanding. The natural faculty of judging is the understanding,
the faculty of inferring is reason. Through experience one becomes clever
but not learned. Cleverness does not consist in science[;] one can be and
become clever without any learnedness. The healthy understanding and
reason show their value especially in praxis^. No science can in the least
replace5 or compensate for a certain lack of the healthy understanding and
its application in concreto, although it can well replace much else. Our
universal judgments alone cannot help us. With all rules I have to know
(i.)' whether they may be applied to the case.
(2.) As to how I am to apply them here, there can be very learned people
lacking all healthy understanding. In the use of the understanding there is
thus something that nature has reserved for genius, as it were, and which
no art can replace.
Through an excess of learnedness people often become all the more
absurd and completely unfit for judging in concreto. The healthy understanding, which is small but correct, involves (i.) simplicity. It remains on
the ground" of experience and does not love chimerical ideals. This very
simplicity makes the understanding all the more correct, certain, and
reliable than science. An academy of sciences in Paris concocts 1000
23 times more errors than a village full of farmers. (2.) Its cognitions are
intuitive through examples and instances. It represents for us the objecta in
natura, while the more refined understanding only shows the shadows of
Reading "im geringsten ersezen" for "im geringsten nicht ersezen."
