Introduction
[The Idea of God]
Human reason has need of an idea of highest perfection, to
serve it as a standard according to which it can make determinations. As regards human affection, for example, we think of
the idea of highest friendship in order to be able to determine
the extent to which this or that degree of friendship approaches
or falls short of it. A person can render a friendly service to
someone else but still take his own welfare into consideration,
or he can offer up everything to his friend with no consideration
for his own advantage. The latter comes closest to the idea of
perfect friendship. A concept of this kind, which is needed as a
standard of lesser or greater degrees in this or that case irrespective of its own reality, is called an idea. But are not these ideas
(such as Plato's idea of a republic, for example) all mere phantoms of the brain? By no means. For I can arrange this or that
situation according to my idea. A ruler, for instance, can arrange
his state according to the idea of a most perfect republic, in order
to bring his state nearer to perfection.
For any idea of this kind, three elements are required: (1) completeness in the determination of the subject with respect to all
Its predicates (for instance, in the concept of God all realities are
m~t with); (2) completeness in the derivation of the existence of
thIngs (for instance, the concept of a highest being which cannot
be derived from any other, but which is rather that from which
everything else must be derived); (3) completeness of commu-[22] 
nity, or the thorough determination of community and connection of the whole.
The world depends on a supreme being, but the things in the
world all mutually depend on one another. Taken together, they
constitute a complete whole. The understanding always seeks to
form a unity in all things, and to proceed to the maximum. Thus
for instance we think of heaven as the highest degree of morality
combined with the highest degree of blessedness, and of hell as
the highest degree of evil combined with the greatest degree of
misery. When we think of evil as the highest degree of evil, we
think of it as an immediate inclination to take satisfaction in evil
merely because it is evil, with neither remorse nor enticement and
with no consideration for profit or advantage. We form this idea
in order to determine the intermediate degrees of evil according
to it.
How does an idea of reason differ from an ideal of imagination? An idea is a universal rule in abstracto, whereas an ideal is
an individual case which I bring under this rule. Thus for example, Rousseau's Emile and the education to be given him is a
true idea of reason. But nothing determinate can be said about
the ideal. A person can have every excellent attribute applied to
him regarding the way in which he should conduct himself as
ruler, father, or friend, but this will not exhaust the account of
what these attributes amount to in this or that case (an example
of this is Xenophon's Cyropaedia.) 1 The cause of this demand for
completeness lies in the fact that otherwise we could have no
concept of perfection. Human virtue is always imperfect. For
this reason we must have a standard, in order to see how far this
imperfection falls short of the highest degree of virtue. It is the
same with vice. We leave out of the idea of vice everything
which could limit the degree of vice. In morality it is necessary
to represent the laws in their moral perfection and purity. But it
would be something else again for someone to realize such an
idea. And even if this is not completely possible, the idea is still
1. The point of this illustration is a bit clearer m the Danzig manuscript of
the lectures: "The idea in an mdlvlduo is an idea!. E.g., the Cyrus of Xenophon
is an idea of a perfect prince, which Xenophon here sets forth in concreto" (Kant,
Gesammelte Schnften, vo!. 28,2,2, p. 1233). [23]
of great utility. In his Emile, Rousseau himself admits that a
whole lifetime (or the better part of it) would be required to give
one single individual the education he describes.
Now we come to the idea of a highest being. Let us represent
to ourselves: (1) A being which excludes every deficiency. (If, for
example, we imagine a man who is at once learned and virtuous,
this may be a great degree of perfection, but many deficiencies
still remain.) (2) A being which contains all realities in itself.
Only in this way will the concept be precisely determined. This
concept can also be thought as the most perfect nature, or the
combination of everything belonging to a most perfect nature
(for example, understanding and will). (3) It can be considered
as the highest good, to which wisdom and morality belong.
The first of these perfections is called transcendental perfection;
the second is called physical, and the third, practical perfection.
[What Is Theology?]
What is theology? It is the system of our knowledge of the
highest being. How is ordinary knowledge distinguished from
theology? Ordinary knowledge is an aggregate, in which one
thing is placed next to another without regard for combination
and unity. In a system, the idea of the whole rules throughout.
The system of knowledge of God does not refer to the sum total
of all possible knowledge of God, but only to what human reason meets with in God. The knowledge of everything in God is
what we call theologia archetypa, and this knowledge is only to be
found in God himself. The system of knowledge of that part of
God which lies in human nature is called theologia ectypa, and
it can be very deficient. It does constitute a system, however,
since all the insights which reason affords us can always be
thought in a unity.
The sum total of all possible knowledge of God is not possible
for a human being, not even through a true revelation. But it is
one of the worthiest of inquiries to see how far our reason can
go in the knowledge of God. Rational theology can also be
brought to completion, in the sense that no human reason has
the capacity to achieve a more extensive knowledge or insight.
Hence it is an advantage for reason to be able to point out its[24] 
boundaries completely. In this way theology relates to the capacity for all pOSSible knowledge of God.
All our knowledge is of two kinds, positive and negative.
Positive knowledge is very limited, but this makes the gain of
negative knowledge so much the greater. As regards positive
knowledge of God, our knowledge is no greater than ordinary
knowledge. But our negative knowledge is greater. Common
practice does not see the sources from which it creates knowledge. It is thus uncertain whether there are more sources from
which more knowledge could be created. This follows from the
fact that common practice is not acquainted with the boundaries
of its understanding.
What interest does reason have in this knowledge? Not a
speculative, but a practical one. The object is much too sublime
for us to be able to speculate about it. In fact, we can be led into
error by speculation. But our morality has need of the idea of
God to give it emphasis. Thus it should not make us more
learned, but better, wiser, and more upright. For if there is a
supreme being who can and will make us happy, and if there is
another life, then our moral dispositions will thereby receive
more strength and nourishment, and our moral conduct will be
made firmer. Our reason does find a small speculative interest
in these matters, but it is of very little value in comparison with
the practical one. This speculative interest is only that our reason always needs a highest in order to measure and determine
the less high according to it.
We sometimes ascribe an understanding to God. To what extent can we do this? If we do not know the boundaries of our
own understanding, then even less can we think of the divine
understanding. But here too we must have a maximum, and we
can only obtain it by canceling all limitations. Hence we say that
our understanding can only know things by means of universal
characteristics, but, since this is a limitation of the human understanding, it cannot be found in God. Thus we think of a
maximum understanding, that is, an intuitive understanding.
This gives us no concept at all, but such a maximum serves to
make the lesser degrees determinate. If for example we want to
determine human benevolence, we can only do it by thinking of [25]
the highest benevolence, which is found in God. And then it is
easy to determine the intermediate degrees according to it. Thus
in our knowledge the concept of God is not so much extended
as determined. For the maximum always has to be determinate.
For instance, the concept of a right is wholly and precisely determined. But the concept of equity is quite indeterminate. For it
means that I should forego my right to some extent. But how
much? If I forego too much, I will violate my own right.
Hence in morality too we are referred to God. For it tells us to
aspire to the highest idea of morality formed according to the
highest being. But how can we do this? To this end we must see
to what extent our morality falls short of the morality of the
highest being. In this way the concept of God can be of service
to us, and it can also serve as a gauge by which we are able to
determine smaller distinctions in morals. Thus we do have a
speculative interest here too. But how insignificant it is! For it is
no more than a means enabling us to represent in a determinate
way whatever is to be found between the maximum and nothing. How small, then, this speculative interest is compared to
the practical interest which has to do with our making ourselves
into better men, with uplifting our concepts of morality and with
placing before our eyes the concepts of our moral conduct!
Theology cannot serve to explain the appearances of nature to
us. In general it is not a correct use of reason to posit God as the
ground of everything whose explanation is not evident to us.
On the contrary, we must first gain insight into the laws of nature if we are to know and explain its operations. In general it
is no use of reason and no explanation to say that something is
due to God's omnipotence. This is a lazy reason, and we will
have more to say about it later. 2 But if we ask who has so firmly
established the laws of nature and who has limited its operations, then we will come to God as the supreme cause of the
entirety of reason and nature. Let us now ask further: What
worth has our knowledge of God, or our rational theology? It
has no worth just because it deals with the highest object, or has
2. This is the error of ignava ratio which Kant criticizes in the Critzque of Pure
Reason, A689fB717. See also the present Lectures, opening paragraph of the Second Part.[26] 
God as its object. We ought rather to ask whether we have
knowledge of this object which is appropriate to the worth of
this object itself. In morality we see that not only does the object
have worth, but the knowledge of it has worth too. Hence it is
obvious that theology has no cause to boast just because the
object of its knowledge is a being of highest worthiness. In any
case our knowledge is only a shadow in comparison with the
greatness of God, and our powers are far transcended by him.
The real question is: Does our knowledge have worth despite
this? And the answer is: Yes, insofar as it is related to religion.
For religion is nothing but the application of theology to morality, that is, to a good disposition and a course of conduct wellpleasing to the highest being. Natural religion is thus the substratum of all religion, and the firmest support of all moral
principles. And to the extent that it is the hypothesis for all
religion, and gives weight to all our concepts of virtue and uprightness, natural theology contains a value which raises it
above any speculation.
Are there divines3 in natural theology? There is no such thing
as being naturally learned. In revealed religion there can be a
place for learning, since it must be known. But in natural religion there is no place for learning. For here there is nothing to
be done but to prevent errors from creeping in, and this is fundamentally not a kind of learning. In general no knowledge of
reason a priori can be called learning. Learning is the sum total
of knowledge which must be taught.
The theolOgian or divine must have true learning, since he
must interpret the Bible, and interpretation depends on languages and much else which can be taught. In the time of the
Greeks, philosophical schools were divided into physicas and
3. Divine = Gottesgelehrte (literally, "one learned of God"). Kant's discussion is dearly intended as a criticism of Eberhard's use of the term Gottesgelehrtheit: "[In theology] the knowledge of God has to be taken in the greatest perfection possible for men; that is, it must be the richest, most correct, clearest,
most evident, and most living knowledge, or, in short, it must be most scientific
or learned. Such knowledge, even the more limited ones, contain religIOn. We
do well to distinguish these two kinds of knowledge of God. For every man
has to have religion, but not every man needs to be a divine (Gottesgelehrte)"
(Eberhard, Vorbereitung zur naturlichen Theologie [Balle, 1781], p. 4). [27]
theologicas. But the latter must not be understood to be schools
studying the contemporary religious usages and learning their
sacred formulas and other such superstitious stuff. Rather they
were rational inquirers. They saw which concepts of God lay in
reason, how far reason could proceed in the knowledge of God,
where the boundaries in the field of knowledge were, and so on.
This depended only on the use of reason. But knowledge of God
depended on learning.
Now let us ask: What is the minimum of theology required
for religion? What is the smallest knowledge of God necessary
to move us to have faith in God and thus direct our course of
life? What is the smallest, narrowest concept of theology? It
consists only in needing a religion and having a concept of God
sufficient for natural religion. But this minimum is supplied if I
see that my concept of God is possible and that it does not contradict the laws of the understanding. Can everyone be convinced of this much? Yes, everyone can, because no one is in a
position to rob us of this concept and prove it impossible. Hence
this is the smallest possible requirement for religion. With only
this as its basis, there is still a place for religion. But the possibility of the concept of God is supported by morality, since
otherwise morality would have no incentives. Moreover, the
mere possibility of such a being is sufficient to produce religion
in man. But this is not the maximum of theology. It would be
better if I knew that such a being actually exists. It is believed
that the Greeks and Romans of antiquity who devoted themselves to an upright life had no concept of God other than the
possibility of this concept. And this was sufficient to move them
to a religion.
We now have sufficient insight to tell that we will be satisfied
from a practical standpoint, but from a speculative standpoint
our reason will find little satisfaction. As we strive to present the
concept of God we will guard ourselves from errors and contradictions from a speculative standpoint, and we must hold our
reason very much in check if we are to be safe from the assaults
of the foes of theology. But if our aim is moral, we must first of
all guard ourselves against any errors which might have an influence on our morality.[28] 
Natural theology is of two kinds (a) theologia rationalis and (b)
theologia empirica. But since God is not an object of sense and
hence cannot be an object of experience, we can only be capable
of a theologia empirica through the help of a divine revelation. But
from this it follows that there are no kinds of theology but those
of reason and revelation. Rational theology is either speculative
(with theoretical science as its ground) or moral (with practical
knowledge as its object). The former could also be called speculative theology and the latter, which we draw from practical principles, would then be called moral theology. Speculative theology would further be either (1) transcendental, taking its origin
merely from pure understanding and reason independent of all
experience, or (2) natural. The former is to be distinguished from
natural theology because in it we are able to represent God in
comparison with ourselves wherever there is something in us
founded on a nature from which we can draw attributes applicable to God. But in natural theology there is never the purity of
concepts found in transcendental theology, where all concepts
are taken from pure reason alone.
Nature is the sum total of objects of experience. I can consider
nature either as the nature of the world in general or as the constitution of everything present. Hence natural theology can be of
two kinds: (1) cosmotheology, in which I consider the nature of a
world in general and argue from it to the existence of an author
of the world; or (2) physicotheology, in which I come to know a
God from the constitution of the present world.
The above is a division wholly according to logical rules. But
to be precise, we should divide rational theology into (a) transcendentalem, (b) naturalem, and (c) moralem. In the first I think of
God solely in terms of transcendental concepts. In the second I
think of him in terms of physical concepts, and in the last I think
of God in terms of concepts drawn from morals. If we determine
this more closely, we will think of God as the original being
which is (1) not a derivativum, not a being determined by or dependent on another, and (2) the cause of all possible and existing beings. Hence I will think of God in the following ways.
