Preface
[Kant launches this work by
distinguishing two senses of the word ‘nature’. There is
(n) its use in phrases of the form ‘the nature of. . . ’, where
a nature is a quality, and (N) its use as a proper name,
‘Nature’, which signifies not a quality but the sum-total of
everything that can be an object of our senses and thus also
an object of experience. Kant also lingers on (n) in order to
distinguish ‘the nature of. . . ’ from ‘the essence of. . . , but
this won’t concern us in the present work, whose central
concern is with (N) Nature—the whole world that we can
know about through our senses. [Because he was writing in
German, Kant had to use a capital ‘N’ for Natur in each of those senses.
In English we have a choice; and this version will use ‘nature’ for the
‘nature of . . . ’ concept and ‘Nature’ for the name of a single entity.]]
Kant continues:] Nature taken in this sense of the word has
two main parts, corresponding to the main line through our
senses:
One part contains the objects of the •external senses.
Any theory about that will be a doctrine of •body,
dealing with extended Nature.
The other part contains the object of the •internal
sense. Any theory about it will be a doctrine of •soul,
dealing with thinking Nature.
[Kant’s Lehre has to be translated as ‘doctrine’, but really that is misleading. He will label as a Lehre any disciplined body of fact-and-theory
about a given subject; any respectable university department will be
dedicated to some Lehre; but a Lehre can be much too small to support a
department—e.g. Kant will speak about ‘the doctrine of the properties of a
straight line’!] If a doctrine is a system—i.e. a knowledge-total
ordered according to principles—then it’s what we call a
science. Now, there are two sorts of principles that can
connect items of knowledge so that they constitute a whole:468
•empirical principles and •rational principles. This could
prompt us to distinguish ‘historical natural science’ from
‘rational natural science’; but it turns out that this is a bad
way of stating things. [Kant’s explanation of why is confusing:
he announces it as focussing on the meaning of ‘Nature’ but
states it in terms of the meaning of ‘science’. [We’ll see that
both items are involved.] The core of the explanation is that
any natural science, properly so-called, must include principles that rationally hold items of knowledge together. Kant
continues:] So the doctrine of Nature—whether extended or
thinking—might better be divided into
(a) the historical doctrine of Nature, which contains
nothing but the systematically ordered facts about
natural things—presenting •Nature as a system of
classes of natural things ordered according to similarities, and the •history of Nature as a systematic
account of natural things in different times and in
different places; and (b) natural science.
And natural science properly so-called would treat its subjectmatter wholly according to a priori principles, while natural
science improperly so-called would treat its subject-matter
according to laws of experience.
Nothing counts as science proper unless it is •apodeictically
certain, ·i.e. certain because it is absolutely necessary·; any
cognitive structure that makes use of merely •empirical
certainty is only improperly called ‘science’. . . . An example
of the latter is chemistry, the basic premises of which are
merely empirical; the laws from which the given facts are
logically deduced in chemistry are merely laws of experience,
which •don’t bring with them any consciousness of their
necessity and therefore •aren’t apodeictically certain. So
that entire structure doesn’t strictly count as a ‘science’,
and would be better referred to as a systematic art. [This uses
‘art’, as Kant uses the corresponding word Kunst, to mean something like
1  Preface
‘disciplined assemblage of skills’.]
So a rational doctrine of Nature deserves the label ‘natural science’ only when the laws of Nature that underlie it
are (1) known a priori and aren’t mere (2) laws of experience. Knowledge of Nature of kind (1) is called pure rational
knowledge; knowledge of kind (2) is called applied rational
knowledge. Since the word ‘Nature’ already carries with it
the concept of laws, and since that carries with it the concept
469 of. . . .necessity, it’s easy to see •why something can count
as natural science only because of the pure part of it, i.e.
the part containing the a priori principles of all the other
explanations of Nature, and •why it’s only because of this
pure part that it is a science. Thus, every discipline dealing
with Nature must, according to reason’s demands, eventually
come to be natural science, because the very concept of
Nature has the necessity of laws inseparably attached to it
and required for Nature to be thoroughly understood. [•This
removes the confusion mentioned in an earlier note. Kant holds that both
the concepts of Nature and those of science conceptually involve necessary law; so any disciplined treatment of Nature must bring in such laws,
thereby helping to qualify itself as a science. •Why ‘reason’s demands’?
Because of Kant’s doctrine—expounded in his Critique of Pure Reason but
not here—that reason constantly urges us to interconnect our various
items of knowledge, always restlessly trying to get it all into a single
rigidly interconnected system.] That is why the most complete
explanation of certain phenomena by chemical principles
always leaves us dissatisfied, because it has involved only
contingent laws learned by mere experience, with no input
from anything a priori.
Thus all genuine natural science requires a pure part
which could be the basis for the apodeictic certainty that
reason looks for in such science. And since the principles
at work in the pure part make it completely different from
the part whose principles are only empirical, there is a lot
to be gained from a procedure in which the empirical part is
kept out of sight while we expound the pure part on its own,
as completely as we possibly can, so as to discover exactly
•what reason can accomplish unaided, and •where it starts
to need help from principles of experience. . . . ·And now I
need to introduce another distinction·:
•Pure philosophy (= metaphysics) is pure rational
knowledge from mere concepts; •Mathematics is pure
rational knowledge that is based entirely on the construction of concepts by means of the presentation of
the object in a priori intuition.
[That account of mathematics comes from a theory of Kant’s which is
easiest to grasp in application to geometry. Take the proposition that the
total length of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the length of the
third side; how do you know that this is true? Not empirically, by (1)
measuring the sides of triangular things, or by (2) reading it off from the
concept triangle.
By method (1) we could only get truths known a posteriori, i.e.
from experience.
By method (2) we could only derive analytic truths—ones knowable through conceptual analysis.
What is remarkable about geometrical truths is that they are known a
priori and yet are synthetic—i.e. known without appeal to experience
but not by being derived purely from concepts. Well, then, how are
they known? Kant’s answer is this: If you know that proposition about
triangles (and haven’t merely taken it on trust from someone else), you
must have constructed a triangle in your mind’s eye and seen from this
that the proposition is true. In our present text Kant writes here and
below of ‘constructing concepts’, but that is misleading. He doesn’t think
that in this process you construct any concept. Rather, you construct,
under the guidance of a concept, a mental triangle.] Natural science
properly so-called presupposes the metaphysics of Nature,
·i.e. pure rational knowledge from mere concepts·. Why? Because a science properly so-called has to include necessary
propositions, and in this science they must be necessary
truths having to do with the existence of things; so they can’t
2  Preface
be based on a priori intuition, because no such intuition
can present anything concerning existence. The necessary
propositions involved in natural science, therefore, have to be
the concept-based ones that define ‘metaphysics of Nature’.
There are two possibilities for what they might be:
(1) The metaphysics of Nature might deal with the laws
that make possible the concept of a thing’s nature, without
bringing in any specific object of experience, and therefore
not saying anything specific about any particular kinds of
empirical object. The part of the metaphysics of Nature that
470 does this is its transcendental part. [For Kant a ‘transcendental’
principle is one that has to do with the conditions that make possible
some kind of knowledge.]
(2) The metaphysics of Nature might instead deal with
the special nature of this or that kind of thing, of which it
has an empirical concept; doing this in such a way it doesn’t
look to experience for anything except this concept. (·If it
looked to experience for information, it wouldn’t count as
‘metaphysics’·.) For example, it takes as its foundation the
empirical concept of a material thing or the empirical concept
of a thinking thing, and searches for anything that reason
can teach us a priori regarding these things. This science
would still count as a ‘metaphysic’ of Nature—specifically, of
corporeal or of thinking Nature—but it wouldn’t be a •general
metaphysic but rather •a special metaphysical natural science (physics and psychology), in which the transcendental
principles mentioned in (1) are applied to the two sorts of
sense-objects.
In any special doctrine of Nature there is only as much
genuine science as there is mathematics. As I have explained,
a science (properly so-called) of Nature must have a pure
part that is the foundation for the empirical part and is based
upon a priori knowledge of natural things. ·Let us now look
very carefully into this notion of a priori knowledge of natural
things·. To know something a priori is to know it from its
mere possibility. But the possibility of specific natural things
·such as bodies and minds· can’t be discovered from their
mere concepts. ·For example·: from the concept of body
we can discover the possibility of having a self-consistent
thought about a body, but we can’t discover the possibility
of a body as a natural thing that could exist outside of
the thought of it. So if we are to have knowledge of the
possibility of specific kinds of natural things, and hence to
know ·truths about· them a priori, we’ll need to be given
a priori an intuition corresponding to the concept, i.e. we
need the concept to be constructed. And rational knowledge
through the construction of concepts is mathematical. It may
be possible to dispense with mathematics in developing a
•pure philosophy of Nature in general, i.e. one whose only
topic is what constitutes the concept of a nature in general;
but a pure doctrine of Nature concerning specific natural
things (a doctrine of body or a doctrine of soul) is possible
only through mathematics. . . .
[That’s why chemistry can’t be a science, Kant says. For
it to be a science it would have to derive chemical laws about 471
how different sorts of matter react with one another from
an a priori intuition—something constructed in our minds.
And there is no chance of that. And so, Kant continues,]
chemistry can’t be anything more than a systematic art or
experimental doctrine, never a science proper, because the
principles of chemistry are merely empirical and can’t be
presented a priori in intuition. . . .
But the empirical study of the soul must always be even
further from qualifying as a natural science than chemistry
is. Why? Because mathematics can’t be applied to the
phenomena of inner sense and their laws. (‘But the flow of
inner sense’s internal changes is continuous, and continuity
can be treated mathematically.’ Yes, but •what that could
3  Preface
add to the content of the doctrine of the soul is vastly less
than •what mathematics can add to the content of the
doctrine of body; in about the way that •the doctrine of
the properties of a straight line are less than •the whole
of geometry! In each case, the tiny doctrine concerns only
a single dimension—in the case of the soul it’s the single
dimension of time.) Anyway, if we ·keep mathematics out of
the picture and· think of the doctrine of the soul merely as as
a •systematic art of analysis or as an •experimental doctrine,
it still falls wells short of chemistry, ·in three ways·. (i) Given
any two elements in the complex of events observed through
inner sense, I can think of them them separately, but I can’t
separate them and then bring them together as I choose. (ii)
I can’t investigate the mental events in someone else’s mind.
(iii) With mental events, ·unlike chemical ones·, an observed
event can be altered and distorted by the mere fact of being
observed. So the doctrine of the soul can’t be anything more
than . . . . a •natural description of the soul, not a •science of
it, and not even a •psychological experimental doctrine. That
is why in the title of this work—which really contains only the
principles of the doctrine of body—I have followed standard
usage in employing the general name ‘natural science’; for
strictly speaking it’s only the doctrine of body that is entitled
to be called ‘science’.
472 But it can’t be natural science unless mathematics is
brought into it, and that can’t happen until. . . .a complete
analysis of the absolutely general concept of matter has been
provided. Providing that is the business of pure philosophy.
