Mr. Eberhard has made the discovery that, as his Philosophisches Magazin 8: 187
(vol. I, p. 289) proclaims, “the Leibnizian philosophy contains just as
much of a critique of reason as the more recent one, whereby it nevertheless introduces a dogmatism grounded in a careful analysis of the
cognitive faculties, therefore containing everything that is true in the
latter, but still more besides in a grounded extension of the domain of
the understanding.” How it came to pass that these things were not long
ago already seen in the great man’s philosophy and in its daughter, the
Wolffian, he does not, to be sure, explain; yet how many discoveries regarded as new are not now seen with complete clarity in the ancients by
skilled interpreters, once they have been shown what they should look
for!
One could let pass the failure of a claim to originality, did not the
older critique contain in its results the exact opposite of the new one;
for in that case, the argumentum ad verecundiam (as Locke called it),1
which Mr. Eberhard, fearing that his own might not suffice, craftily uses
(sometimes, as on p. 298, with distortion of meaning), would be a great
obstacle to the acceptance of the latter. Yet it is a dubious enterprise to
refute propositions of pure reason by means of books (which can themselves have been based on no sources other than those to which we are
just as near as their author). Perspicacious as Mr. Eberhard generally is,
he has perhaps not seen clearly this time. Besides, he sometimes speaks
as if he will not vouch for Leibniz (e.g., p. 381 and p. 393 note).2 It is
therefore best to leave the great man out of the picture and to consider
the propositions which Mr. Eberhard ascribes to his name and uses as
weapons against the Critique, as his own assertions; for otherwise we
would find ourselves in the nasty situation, that in justifiably parrying
the blows which he administers to us in the other’s name, we might hit
a great man, thereby drawing upon ourselves the odium of those who
admire him.
According to the example of the jurists in the conduct of a trial, 8: 188
the first item that we have to consider in this quarrel is the form.
Mr. Eberhard explains his position here as follows (p. 255): “According
to the arrangement of the journal, it is perfectly permissible to break off
or continue our journeys at will, we can proceed forwards and backwards and
turn in all directions.” – Now, one can readily grant that a magazine3
may contain entirely different things in its different sections and divisions (as in this one, a treatise on logical truth is followed immediately
by a contribution to the history of beards, and this by a poem); but Mr.
Eberhard will hardly be able to justify by means of this characteristic
of a magazine (which would then become a junk-closet) that completely
heterogeneous things should be mixed with one another in the same section, or that the hindmost be brought to the fore and the lowest to the
top, especially if, as is here the case, the concern is with the comparison
283
of two philosophical systems; and, in fact, he is far from judging in this
way.
This seemingly artless arrangement of themes is actually very carefully
contrived, in order to entice the reader into accepting in advance, before
the touchstone of truth has been determined and while he therefore still
has none, propositions that require a close examination, and afterwards
to prove the validity of the touchstone, which is only selected subsequently, not, as it should be, on the basis of its own nature, but by means
of those very propositions that it puts to the test (not those that put the
test to it). It is a clever hysteron proteron,4 designed to avoid gracefully the
search for the elements of our a priori cognition and the ground of their
validity with regard to objects prior to all experience, and therefore the
deduction of their objective reality (as lengthy and difficult labors), and,
where possible, to refute the Critique with a stroke of the pen, while at
the same time making room for an unlimited dogmatism of pure reason.
For as everyone knows, the critique of pure understanding begins with
this inquiry, which has as its goal the solution of the general question:
how are synthetic propositions possible a priori? And only after a laborious consideration of all of the conditions requisite for this can it arrive
at the decisive conclusion: that to no concept can its objective reality
be secured, save insofar as it can be presented in a corresponding in-
8: 189 tuition (which for us is always sensory), so that beyond the bounds of
sensibility and thus of possible experience, there can be no cognition
whatever, that is, no concepts of which one is sure that they are not
empty. – The magazine begins with the refutation of this proposition
by means of the demonstration of the opposite: namely, that there is
indeed an extension of cognition beyond objects of the senses, and ends
with the investigation of how this is possible a priori through synthetic
propositions.
So the plot of the first volume of the Eberhardian magazine is really
made up of two acts. In the first the objective reality of our concepts of the
nonsensible is to be established, in the other the problem of how synthetic
propositions are possible a priori is to be solved. For so far as concerns
the principle of sufficient reason, which he expounds on pp. 163–66,
it is there in order to establish the reality of the concept of ground in
this synthetic principle; but by the author’s own account on p. 316, it
also belongs to the number of those synthetic and analytic judgments,
where something is first of all to be decided concerning the possibility
of synthetic principles. All of the remainder, that is mentioned here and
there beforehand, or in between, consists of allusions to future proofs,
appeals to earlier proofs, citations from Leibniz and other assertions, as
well as attacks on expressions, usually with distortion of their sense,
and the like; exactly according to the advice that Quintilian gives to
the orator about his arguments, in order to deceive his audience: Si non
284
possunt valere, quia magna sunt, valebunt quia multa sunt. – Singula levia
sunt et communia, universa tamen nocent; etiamsi non ut fulmine, tamen ut
grandine;5 all of which only deserves to be taken up in a postscript. It is
bad enough to have to deal with an author who knows no order, but it is
even worse to deal with one who affects disorder in order to let shallow
or false propositions slip through unnoticed.
285Section One
Concerning the objective reality of those
concepts to which no corresponding
sensory intuition can be given,
according to Mr. Eberhard
Mr. Eberhard devotes himself (pp. 157–58) to this undertaking with a
8: 190
solemnity appropriate to the importance of the subject: he speaks of his
long, unprejudiced efforts on behalf of a science (metaphysics), which he
regards as a realm from which, if need be, a considerable portion could
be abandoned, and yet an even more considerable area would remain;
he speaks of flowers and fruits promised by the undisputedly fertile fields
of ontology,* and even in regard to the contested fields of cosmology, he
exhorts us not to stop working; for, he says, “We can always continue to
work for its expansion, we can always seek to enrich it with new truths,
without having first to concern ourselves with the transcendental validity of these
truths” (which is here equivalent to the objective reality of its concepts),
and he adds: “In this way have the mathematicians themselves completed
the delineation of entire sciences, without saying a single word about the
reality of their object.” Meanwhile, desiring that the reader should be fully
attentive to this point, he says: “This may be illustrated by a notable
example, by an example that is too pertinent and instructive for me not to
be allowed to cite it here.” Yes, quite instructive; for never has a more ex-
8: 191 cellent example been given as a warning not to appeal to arguments from
sciences that one does not understand, not even on the assurance of other
famous men who merely report on the matter; since it is to be expected
that one will not understand this either. For Mr. Eberhard could not have
more forcefully refuted himself and his announced project than by the
judgment repeated from Borelli 6 concerning the Conica of Apollonius.7
* But these are precisely the fields whose concepts and principles, as claims to a
cognition of things in general, have been challenged, and have been limited to the
much narrower field of objects of possible experience. This endeavor to refuse
in advance to be concerned with the question of the titulum possessionis reveals
right away an artifice to keep the actual point of the dispute out of sight of the
judge.
286
Apollonius first constructs the concept of a cone, that is, he exhibits it
a priori in intuition (this is the first action whereby the geometer verifies
in advance the objective reality of his concept). He cuts it according to a
determinate rule, e.g., parallel to a side of the triangle which intersects
the base of the cone (conus rectus) at right angles through its vertex, and
proves a priori in intuition the attributes of the curved line produced by
this cut on the surface of the cone, and he thus extracts a concept of
the ratio in which its ordinates stand to the parameter, which concept,
namely (in this case), the parabola, is thereby given a priori in intuition;
consequently, its objective reality, that is, the possibility that a thing with
these properties can be given, is proven in no other way than by providing
the corresponding intuition. – Mr. Eberhard wanted to prove that one can
very well extend one’s cognition and enrich it with new truths, without first considering whether one is proceeding with a concept which
is entirely empty and can have no object (an assertion which is in plain
contradiction with common sense), and he turned to the mathematicians for confirmation of his opinion. He could not, however, have hit
upon a more unfortunate source. – But the misfortune stemmed from
the fact that he was not acquainted with Apollonius himself and did not
understand Borelli,8 who is reflecting on the procedure of the ancient
geometers. The latter speaks of the mechanical construction of concepts
of conic sections (with the exception of the circle), and notes that mathematicians teach the properties of the conic sections without mentioning
the mechanical construction; certainly a true, albeit a very insignificant
remark; for instruction to draw a parabola according to the prescription of the theory is addressed to the artist only, not to the geometer.*
Mr. Eberhard could have learned this from the passage from the remark 8: 192
* The following may serve to secure against misuse the expression ‘construction
of concepts’ of which the Critique of Pure Reason speaks several times, and has
thereby first made an accurate distinction between the procedure of reason in
mathematics and in philosophy. In a general sense one may call construction
all exhibition of a concept through the (spontaneous) production of a corresponding intuition. If it occurs through mere imagination in accordance with
an a priori concept, it is called pure construction (such as must underlie all the
demonstrations of the mathematician; hence he can demonstrate by means of a
circle which he draws with his stick in the sand, no matter how irregular it may
turn out to be, the properties of a circle in general, as perfectly as if it had been
etched in copperplate by the greatest artist). If it is carried out on some kind of
material, however, it could be called empirical construction. The first can also be
called schematic, the second technical construction. Now the latter construction,
which is really improperly so-called, (because it belongs not to science but to
art and is done by means of instruments) is either the geometrical, by compass
and ruler, or the mechanical, for which other instruments are necessary, as for
example, the drawing of the other conic sections besides the circle.
287
of Borelli which he himself cites and has even underscored. It says there:
Subjectum enim definitum assumi potest, ut affectiones variae de eo demonstrentur, licet praemissa non sit ars subjectum ipsum efformandum delineandi.9 It
would be highly absurd, however, to construe this as claiming that the
geometer was first expecting proof, from this mechanical construction,
of the possibility of such a line, and hence of the objective reality of his
concept. One could rather address to the modern geometers a reproach
of the following nature: not that they derive the properties of a curved
line from its definition without first being assured of the possibility of its
object (for in doing so they are fully aware at the same time of the pure,
merely schematic construction, and they also carry out the mechanical
construction afterwards if it is necessary), but that they arbitrarily conceive such a line (e.g., the parabola through the formula ax = y2), and
do not, according to the example of the ancient geometers, first bring it
forth as given in the conic section, which would be more in keeping with
the elegance of geometry, for the sake of which we have often been advised not to neglect so completely the synthetic method of the ancients
in favor of the analytic method which is so rich in inventions.
Mr. Eberhard therefore sets to work as follows, not according to the
example of the mathematicians, but, rather, in the manner of that clever
fellow who could weave a rope out of grains of sand.
8: 193 In the first part of his magazine, he had already distinguished the principles of the form of cognition, which are supposed to be the principles of
contradiction and sufficient reason, from those of its matter (according
to him, representation and extension), whose principle he locates in the
simple of which they are composed; and since nobody denies him the
transcendental validity of the principle of contradiction, he now seeks
in the first place to establish that of the principle of sufficient reason, and
therewith the objective reality of the latter concept, and secondly, the
reality of the concept of a simple being, without, as the Critique demands,
requiring them to be validated by a corresponding intuition. For of what
is true, we do not first have to ask if it is possible, and to that extent
logic has the principle ab esse ad posse valet consequentia10 in common with
metaphysics, or rather lends it to the latter. – We shall likewise now
proceed in our examination in accordance with this division.
A. Demonstration of the objective reality of the concept
of sufficient reason according to Mr. Eberhard
It is first of all worthy of note that Mr. Eberhard wishes to have the
principle of sufficient reason listed merely among the formal principles of cognition, though he nevertheless views it (p. 160) as a question occasioned by the Critique: “whether it also has transcendental validity”
(is in general a transcendental principle). Now, either Mr. Eberhard must
288
have no conception whatever of the difference between a logical (formal)
and a transcendental (material) principle of cognition or, as is more likely,
this is one of his artful maneuvers to substitute for the question at issue
another which no one is asking about.
That every proposition must have a reason a is the logical (formal) principle of cognition, which is subordinated to, and not set beside, the
principle of contradiction.* That every thing must have its ground a is the
transcendental (material) principle, which no one has ever proven or will
prove by means of the principle of contradiction (and in general from
mere concepts without relation to sensory intuition). It is clear enough,
and has been stated countless times in the Critique, that a transcendental
principle must determine something a priori in regard to objects and their
possibility; consequently, it does not, like the logical principles (which
abstract completely from everything concerning the possibility of the
object), merely concern itself with the formal conditions of judgment.
