The Royal Academy of Sciences calls for a survey of the advances in one
20: 259
part of philosophy, in one part of academic Europe, and also during one
part of the present century.
That seems to be a readily performable task, for it only has to do
with history, and since the advances in astronomy and chemistry, qua
empirical sciences, have already found their historians, while those in
mathematical analysis or pure mechanics, achieved in the same country
and period, will soon find theirs, too, if wanted, there seems to be equally
little difficulty with the science here in question.
But this science is metaphysics, and that completely alters the situation. This is a shoreless sea, in which progress leaves no trace behind,
and whose horizon contains no visible goal by which one might perceive
how nearly it has been approached. In regard to this science, which itself
has almost always existed in idea only, the prescribed task is very difficult,
the very possibility of resolving it a thing to be almost despaired of, and
even should it succeed, the condition laid down, of presenting in brief
compass the advances it has achieved, makes the difficulty greater still.
For metaphysics is by nature and intention a completed whole; either
nothing or everything. So what is required for its final purpose cannot be
dealt with in a fragmentary way, as in mathematics or empirical natural
science, where progress is constant and unending. But we shall attempt
the task nonetheless.
The first and most necessary question is doubtless this: What does
reason actually want with metaphysics? What purpose does it have in
view in treating of the subject? For that end is the great, perhaps the
greatest, indeed the one and only purpose which reason can ever look to
in its speculation, since all men are more or less engaged in it, and since
there is no understanding why, given the ever-apparent futility of their
efforts in this field, it would still be in vain to tell them that they should
at last give up rolling this stone of Sisyphus,1 were not the interest that 20: 260
reason takes in the subject the most ardent that can be entertained.
This ultimate purpose, to which the whole of metaphysics is directed,
is easy to discover, and can in this respect found a definition of the subject:
“It is the science of progressing by reason from knowledge of the sensible
to that of the super-sensible.”
But within the sensible2 we include that whose representation is
considered in relation, not merely to the senses, but also to the
353What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany?
understanding, so long as the pure concepts of the latter are thought
in their application to objects of the senses, and thus for purposes of a
possible experience; thus the nonsensory, such as the concept of cause,
which has its seat and origin in the understanding, can still, as regards
knowledge of an object by means of it, be said to belong to the field of
the sensory, that is, to objects of the senses.
Ontology3 is that science (as part of metaphysics) which consists in
a system of all concepts of the understanding, and principles, but only
so far as they refer to objects that can be given to the senses, and thus
confirmed by experience. It makes no allusion to the super-sensible,
which is nevertheless the final aim of metaphysics, and thus belongs to the
latter only as a propaedeutic, as the hallway or vestibule of metaphysics
proper, and is called transcendental philosophy, because it contains the
conditions and first elements of all our knowledge a priori.
In this field there has not been much progress since the days of
Aristotle. For as grammar is the resolution of a speech-form into its
elementary rules, and logic a resolution of the form of thought, so ontology is a resolution of knowledge into the concepts that lie a priori
in the understanding, and have their use in experience; a system whose
troublesome elaboration we may very well be spared, if only we bear
in mind the rules for the right use of these concepts and principles, for
purposes of empirical knowledge; for experience always confirms or corrects it, which does not happen if our design is to progress from the
sensible to the super-sensible, for which purpose an assessment of the
powers of understanding and its principles must indeed be carried out
with thoroughness and care, in order to know from whence, and with
what props and crutches, reason can venture upon its transition from the
objects of experience to those that are not of this kind.
20: 261 Now the celebrated Wolf has rendered an incontestable service to
ontology, by his clarity and precision in analysing these powers; but not
by any addition to our knowledge in that area, since the subject matter
was exhausted.
However, the above definition, which merely indicates what is wanted
of metaphysics, not what there needs to be done in it, would simply
mark it out from other doctrines as a discipline belonging to philosophy
in the specific meaning of the term, i.e., to the doctrine of wisdom,4 and
prescribe its principles to the absolutely necessary practical use of reason;
though that has only an indirect relation to metaphysics considered as
a scholastic science and system of certain theoretical cognitions a priori,
which are made the immediate topic of concern. Hence the explanation
of metaphysics according to the notion of the schools will be that it
is the system of all principles of purely theoretical rational knowledge
through concepts; or in brief, that it is the system of pure theoretical
philosophy.
354What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany?
It therefore contains no practical doctrines of pure reason, though it
does contain the theoretical doctrines which underlie their possibility.
It contains no mathematical propositions, i.e., such as produce rational
knowledge through the construction of concepts, but does contain the
principles of the possibility of a mathematics as such. By reason in this
definition we are, moreover, to understand only the capacity for knowledge a priori, i.e., knowledge which is not empirical.
Now to have a yardstick for what has lately been happening in metaphysics, we must compare it to what has been done in the subject of old,
and both to what ought to have been done there. But we shall be able
to reckon in as a part of the progress, i.e., as a negative advance, the
conscious and deliberate recurrence to maxims of the mode of thought,
since even if it were only the removal of a deep-seated error, spreading
far and wide in its consequences, something can still be done thereby
for the benefit of metaphysics; just as a person who has strayed from
the right path, and returns to his starting point in order to pick up his
compass, is at least commended because he did not go on wandering up
the wrong road, or come to a halt, but reverted to his point of departure
in order to orient himself.
The first and oldest steps in metaphysics were not ventured merely 20: 262
as risky attempts, say, but were made, rather, with complete confidence,
though without having first initiated any careful inquiries as to the possibility of a priori cognitions. What was the cause of this trust that reason
had in itself? Its imagined success. For in mathematics reason succeeded
in knowing a priori the constitution of things, well beyond all expectation of the philosophers; why should there not be just as much success in
philosophy?5 As to the possibility of knowledge a priori, it did not strike
the metaphysicians as a radical difference, to be treated as an important
problem, that mathematics proceeds on the terrain of the sensory, since
reason itself can construct concepts for it, i.e., present them a priori in
intuition, and thus know the objects a priori, whereas philosophy undertakes an extension of reason’s knowledge by mere concepts, where its
objects cannot, as in the other case, be set before us, since they hover, as it
were, ahead of us in the air. It was enough to extend a priori knowledge,
even outside mathematics, by mere concepts, and that this extension
contains truth is evidenced by the agreement of such judgments and
principles with experience.
Now although the super-sensible, to which the aim of reason is directed in metaphysics, actually provides no basis whatever for theoretical
knowledge, the metaphysicians still sallied confidently forth under the
guidance of their ontological principles, which are admittedly a priori
in origin, but valid only for objects of experience; and although the
imagined yield of transcendent insights upon the road could be confirmed by no experience, it could also, precisely because it relates to the
355What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany?
super-sensible, be refuted by no experience either; it was necessary only
to beware of letting any self-contradiction intrude into one’s judgments,
which can perfectly well be done, even though these judgments, and the
concepts underlying them, may otherwise be completely empty.
This path of the dogmatists, which dates back to an age still earlier
than that of Plato and Aristotle, and reaches forward to include even
that of a Leibniz and Wolf, is, if assuredly not the right path, at least the
most natural one to the goal of reason, and to the delusive conviction
that everything which reason undertakes on the analogy of its procedure
when successful, must equally be bound to succeed.
The second and almost equally ancient move made by metaphysics
20: 263 was, on the other hand, a regression, which would have been wise and
profitable to the subject, if only it had extended back to the starting point
of the venture, though not to halt there with the resolve of attempting no
further advance, but rather with that of resuming it in a new direction.
This regression, putting an end to all further initiatives, was based
on the total failure of all attempts in metaphysics. But how could this
failure, and the shipwreck of its grand enterprises, be recognized? Is
it experience, perchance, that refuted them? By no means. For what
reason proclaims to be the extension a priori of its knowledge of the
objects of possible experience, in mathematics and ontology alike, are
real steps, proceeding in a forward direction, and by which it assuredly
gains ground. No, it is with intended and imagined conquests in the
field of the super-sensible, where it is a question of the absolute totality
of Nature, which no sense apprehends, and likewise of God, Freedom
and Immortality; it is there, and chiefly in connection with the latter
three objects, in which reason takes a practical interest, that all attempts
at extension now miscarry; a thing seen, however, not because a deeper
knowledge of the super-sensible, a higher metaphysics, teaches us the
opposite of those earlier opinions; for we cannot compare the one with
the other, since as transcendent objects they are unknown to us. It is
because there are principles in our reason whereby, to every proposition
that would extend our knowledge of such objects, a seemingly no less
authentic counter-proposition is opposed, so that reason itself destroys
its own attempts.6
This path of the skeptic is naturally of somewhat later origin, though
still old enough, and it continues at the same time to persist in very
good minds everywhere, albeit that another interest than that of pure
reason constrains many to conceal the impotence of reason in this matter. The extension of skepticism even to the principles of knowledge of
the sensible, and to experience itself, cannot properly be considered a
serious view that has been current in any period of philosophy, but has
perhaps been a challenge to the dogmatists, to demonstrate those a priori
principles on which the very possibility of experience depends; and since
356What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany?
they could not do this, a way of presenting those principles to them as
doubtful too.
The third and most recent step that metaphysics has taken, by which
its fate must be decided, is the critique of pure reason itself, in regard to 20: 264
its power of effecting an a priori extension of human knowledge generally,
whether it be concerned with the sensible or the super-sensible. If this
critique has performed what it promises, namely to determine the scope,
the content, and the bounds of such knowledge – if it has done this in
Germany, and done it since the days of Leibniz and Wolf – then the
problem of the Royal Academy of Sciences will have been resolved.
There are therefore three stages which philosophy had to traverse
in its approach to metaphysics. The first was the stage of dogmatism;
the second that of skepticism; and the third that of the criticism of pure
reason.7
This temporal sequence is founded in the nature of man’s cognitive capacity. Once the first two stages have been passed, the state of
metaphysics can continue to vacillate for many centuries, leaping from
an unlimited self-confidence of reason to boundless mistrust, and back
again. But a critique of its own powers would put it into a condition
of stability, both external and internal, in which it would need neither
increase nor decrease, nor even be capable of this.
357Treatise
20:265 The solution of the problem in hand can be divided into two sections,
of which one deals with the formal in reason’s procedure for creating
metaphysics as a theoretical science, while the other derives from that
procedure the material – the final aim that reason has in view with metaphysics, whether that aim be achieved or not.
The first part will therefore present merely the steps towards metaphysics that have lately been taken; the second, the advances of metaphysics itself in the field of pure reason. The first contains the current state of transcendental philosophy, the second that of metaphysics
proper.
FIRST SECTION
History of Transcendental Philosophy
among Us in Recent Times
The first step to have been undertaken in this investigation of reason
is the distinction of analytic from synthetic judgments generally.8 Had
this been clearly recognized in the days of Leibniz or Wolf, we should
somewhere find such a distinction not only touched upon, in a Logic or
Metaphysics that has since appeared, but also emphasized as important.
For the first type of judgment is invariably a priori, and coupled with the
consciousness of its necessity. The second can be empirical, and logic is
unable to furnish the condition under which a synthetic a priori judgment
would occur.
20: 266 The second step is simply to have posed the question: How are synthetic a priori judgments possible? For that there are such judgments is
proved by numerous examples from the general theory of Nature, but
especially from pure mathematics. Hume has already performed a service in pointing out a case, namely that of the law of causality, whereby
he put all metaphysicians into a quandary.9 What would have happened
if he, or someone else, had propounded the question in general! The
whole of metaphysics would have had to remain in abeyance until it had
been resolved.
The third step is the problem: “How is an a priori knowledge possible from synthetic judgments?” Knowledge is a judgment from which
proceeds a concept that has objective reality, i.e., to which a corresponding object can be given in experience. But all experience consists in the
358What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany?
intuition of an object, i.e., an immediate and individual representation,
through which the object is given as to knowledge, and a concept, i.e.,
a mediate representation through a characteristic common to many objects, whereby it is therefore thought. Neither of the two types of representation constitutes knowledge on its own, and if there are to be
synthetic a priori cognitions, there must also be a priori intuitions as well
as concepts, whose possibility must therefore first be discussed, and then
their objective reality proved through the necessary use of them, in virtue
of the possibility of experience.
An intuition that is to be possible a priori can only relate to the form
under which the object is intuited, for that means to represent something
a priori to oneself, to make a representation of it to oneself prior to
perception, i.e., prior to and independent of empirical consciousness.
But the empirical in perception, the sensation or impression (impressio),
is the matter of intuition, in which therefore the intuition would not be
an a priori representation. Such an intuition, therefore, as relates merely
to form, is called pure intuition, which if it is to be possible must be
independent of experience.10
But it is not the form of the object, as it is in itself, which makes
intuition a priori possible, but rather that of the subject, namely the form
of sense, of that kind of representation which he, the subject, is capable
of. For if this form were to be taken from the object itself, we would first
have to perceive this, and could become aware of its nature only in this
perception. But that would then be an empirical intuition a priori. But
whether it be the latter or not is something of which we can persuade
ourselves, as soon as we attend to whether the judgment which attributes 20: 267
this form to the object carries necessity with it, or not; for in the latter
case it is merely empirical.
