Section 
1. Start with something x that is substantial and composite,
and analyse it into its simpler elements; this process doesn’t
come to an end until we reach a part that is not a whole
·made up of simpler parts·, i.e. until we reach something
simple. The opposite process of synthesising—·combining
x with other substances·—doesn’t come to an end until
we reach something that isn’t a part ·of anything bigger·,
i.e. until we reach a world.
In this exposition of the concept of a world, I shall not
only attend to the marks appropriate to a distinct knowledge
of the object but shall also give some attention to its two-fold
origin in the nature of the mind. So the exposition may set
an example that leads to a deeper insight into metaphysical
method, which I see as well worth doing. For it is one
thing to (a) employ an abstract notion of the intellect to get
from a thought of the parts to a conception of the whole
that is composed of them, and it is a quite different thing
to (b) take this general notion ·of the composite whole· as
a problem set by reason, and to try to chase it down by
employing the sensitive faculty of knowing, i.e. representing
it in the concrete by a distinct intuition. In (a) composition
is secured through the class concept, if it’s the concept
of a plurality of mutually related things; so this is work for
universal ideas of the intellect. In (b) the endeavour is to
attain the concept of the composite in time, generating it by
successively adding part to part; and that is synthesis, a
process that is subject to the laws of intuition. Similarly,
given a substantial composite, we easily reach the idea of
its simple [see Glossary] parts by stripping from the thought
of it the intellectual notion of composition, because when
composition is removed whatever is left is simple. But when
the laws of intuitive knowledge are in play, it’s a different
story: the only way to remove composition now is by a regress
from the given whole to all its parts, this being an analysis
that occurs in time. [Kant has here a difficult footnote about two
kinds of analysis and a corresponding two kinds of synthesis. We don’t
need this for what follows.]. . . . Thus, for analysis to be carried
through to the point of yielding the concept of the simple, it
must be brought to a conclusion in a finite and assignable
time; and the same is true of a synthesis that is to be yield
the concept of the whole.
In a continuous quantum, however, one can’t get to the
end of the regress from whole to parts; and in an infinite
quantum one can’t get to the end of the progress from parts
1  
to whole. It follows that the analysis can’t be completed, nor
can the synthesis: the laws of intuition won’t let the whole
be represented completely as a composition ·of simple parts·,
or the composite be represented as a totality. And so we get
this situation:
(1) It is often assumed that ‘unrepresentable’ means the
same as ‘impossible’; and
(2) the laws of intuitive knowledge clearly make it impossible to represent the concepts of continuity and
infinitude;
and so we find that
(3) Many people reject these ·two· concepts ·because they
think they’re impossible·.
I am not here arguing in defence of these notions, rejected
as they are (especially the concept of continuity) by many of
the scholastics.1 But those who follow this highly perverse
line of argument should be urgently warned that they are
falling into a very serious error. Something that is
opposed to the laws of understanding and reason
is indeed impossible; but an object of pure reason which is
merely not subject to the laws of intuitive cognition
is not impossible. This disagreement between the sensitive
and the intellectual faculties (more about those later) shows
only this: when the mind receives •abstract ideas from the
intellect, it often can’t pull them through into something
•concrete and turn them into intuitions. But this subjective
inability gives many people a false impression of some objective hindrance, and deceives them, if they aren’t careful, into
taking the limits circumscribing the human mind for limits
imposed by the very essence of things outside the mind.
Furthermore, if substantial composites are given—
whether through the testimony of the senses or in any other
way—it’s easy to see, by an argument based on intellectual
grounds, that both •simples and •a world are also given. . . .
The notion of a world is not merely arbitrary, like a mathematical construct that has been invented only so as to
deduce consequences from it. For when your mind is directed
onto the concept of the composite, whether it’s engaged in
•breaking it up into smaller bits or •putting it together with
others, it demands and assumes in each of these procedures
that there are limits at which it may find rest.
2. The factors to be considered in the definition of a world
are these:
I. Matter, in a transcendental sense, i.e. the parts ·that the
world is composed of·—I’ll assume that they are substances.
[‘. . . in a transcendental sense’? Kant is here appealing to Aristotle’s
distinction between ‘matter’ and ‘form’, i.e. between •what there is and
1 Those who reject the actual mathematical infinite find that the rejection comes easily! (a) Some of them define infinite in such a way that it does
rather easily yield contradictions. According to them:
•an infinite quantum is one such that it’s impossible for any to be larger, and
•the mathematical infinite is a how-manyness [see Glossary] than which a greater is impossible.
But these define ‘maximum’ ·or ‘greatest’·, not ‘infinite’; and a greatest how-manyness is indeed impossible; and that’s how these people infer the
impossibility of this ‘infinite’ that they have invented! (b) Others speak of an infinite how-manyness as an infinite number, and show that this is
absurd, as it clearly is. But this is also fighting only with figments of the mind. If they had conceived the mathematical infinite [infinitum] as a
•how-many that is greater than any •number; and if they had seen that any definite [definitum] concept of a how-many can be attained only by
successively adding unit to unit and bringing this process to an end in a finite [finito] time; then they would have seen that things that don’t square
with a certain law of human knowledge might be known by some non-human intellect that could see some how-manyness at a glance, with no need
count it.
2  
•what it is like. In this context, ‘matter’ is used not in its everyday
empirical sense, standing for •a certain kind of stuff, but rather in its
‘transcendental’ sense, standing for •the things-or-stuff that the world is
made of—the whatever-it-is that has the ‘form’.]
It doesn’t matter whether my definition of ‘world’ squares
with the word’s meaning in ordinary language, because what
I am investigating is just the problem—arising according
to the laws of reason—of •how a number of substances
can coalesce into one, and •what brings it about that this
one is not a part of anything else. ·I use ‘world’ to mean
‘something that has parts and isn’t itself a part’, but that bit
of terminology isn’t essential to my inquiry·. [Kant goes on
to say that the ordinary-language meaning of ‘world’ does
in fact square with his technical meaning for it. He skips
through a few views about ‘worlds’ that are wrong when
the word is taken in his sense and that ordinary thoughtful
people would also think to be wrong. For example, Leibniz’s
view that ‘each soul is a little world’.] A final point: I haven’t
said anything about whether the substances that make up a
world are contingent or necessary; nor do I follow the usual
procedure of •building an answer to that question into my
definition and then ·triumphantly· •extracting it again by
‘argument’! I’ll show later on that the conditions I have laid
down abundantly prove that the substances are contingent.
II. Form, which consists in the co-ordination of substances—
not in the subordination of them. Co-ordinates are mutually
related as complements forming a whole; subordinates are
related as •cause and effect or more generally as •ground
and consequent. Co-ordination is reciprocal, and the same
names are used for each of the related items—each of them
refers to the other as determining it and being determined
by it. In subordination the names are different for the two related items—one is spoken of purely in terms of •dependency,
the other purely in terms of •causality. This co-ordination is
conceived as real and objective, not as ideal and subjective,
arising from someone’s arbitrarily choosing to think of some
aggregate as a whole. By embracing a plurality ·in your
thought· you can easily fashion a representation-of-a-whole,
but it won’t be a representation of an ·actual objective· whole.
The difference I am talking about is that between
(a) a genuine objective world: an aggregate of substances
that are held together by bonds of transeunt [see
Glossary] causation linking them with one another, and
(b) an aggregate of substances whose togetherness consists only in their being forced together by a unifying
act of thought.
[Kant speaks of (b) as involving a plurality of worlds held together in a
single thought, but that must have been a slip of the pen.] Let’s be
clear about (a): what constitutes the essential form of a
world—the fact about it that is absolutely required for it
to be a world—is not any set of facts about how transeunt
causation plays out among the world’s parts. Those facts
are all contingent; they concern what state the world is
in, but are irrelevant to its status as a world. [The bold type
of this next bit is explained in the note at the top of page 1.] What’s
essential to the world qua world is there being some principle
[see Glossary] that makes it possible for there to be transeunt
causation among these substances—possible for these substances, though independent of one another so far as their
•existence is concerned, to depend on one another for the
•states they are in. Without such a principle, there couldn’t
be transeunt force in the world.
Because this form is essential to a world ·that has it·,
it can’t be changed in any way. ·There are two reasons for
this·. (i) it is secured by logic. In every change, some one
thing goes from being F to being G. Note the need for a
single thing to continue through the change. It’s the same
with the world: through all its successive states it remains
3  
the same world, and must therefore keep the same basic
·essential· form. (Don’t think it could remain the same just
by the continuing existence of its parts; its identity requires
that it keep the same characteristic composition.) Also (ii) if
a world’s essence could change, that would mean that the
basic internal principle of all the changes that occur in it
would be opposed to itself, ·which is impossible·. . . . [Point (ii)
is a striking echo of proposition 4 in Part III of Spinoza’s Ethics.]
Those who see no need for this ·kind of· investigation
have been led astray by the concepts of space and time.
They see space and time as basic,. . . .and as sufficient—all
by themselves, without any other principle entering the
picture—to make it not merely •possible but •necessary for
a number of existing things to be inter-related as parts
constituting a whole. I’ll show later that these notions ·of
space and time· don’t come from reason, and are ideas not of
any •objectively real connections but of •phenomena. They
do indeed tell us that there is some common principle holding
everything together, but they don’t show us what it is.
III. Allness, i.e. containing absolutely all the component
parts. There’s a notion of relative allness [see Glossary] that
we can apply to anything that has parts, even if it is itself
a part of something bigger, e.g. thinking about all the parts
of the Rock of Gibraltar. But when allness is applied to a
world, the thought is of all things whatsoever. This absolute
allness, though it looks like an everyday concept that it’s
easy to understand,. . . .turns out on investigation to present
the philosopher with a crucial problem. It’s hard to conceive
how the the universe’s never-to-be completed series of states,
running on to eternity, can be brought together into a whole
that includes absolutely all changes. Indeed it follows from
its very infinity that the series has no stopping-point; so no
strung-out series of events can be given except as part of a
further series. It follows that there’s no place here for all-in
completeness, absolute totality. We can have the thought
a single series containing all the things that are parts
of anything,
but the concept of a whole—·as distinct from the mere
abstract concept of all·–seems to demand that all those
things should be taken simultaneously; and in the present
case that’s impossible. . . .
You might think that the obstacle to the thought of
a whole infinite series of items strung out through time
doesn’t arise in the case of a simultaneous infinite, because
that involves only the notion of all things at a single time.
But ·that is not right·. The simultaneous infinite and the
successive infinite stand or fall together. [Kant’s given reason
for this amounts to saying: We can’t make sense of ‘an
infinity of cubic yards of space right now’ if we can’t—and
we can’t—make sense of the idea of tagging them all one by
one. He continues:] The laying-out of a plurality—whether
successive or simultaneous—rests on concepts of time. If
you are looking for a way out of this thorny problem, bear in
mind that it’s not a problem about the intellectual concept of
whole, but only about the conditions of sensitive intuition. . . .
4  
Section II: The distinction between sensible things and intelligible things in general
3. Your sensibility is your receptivity, ·your ability to be
on the receiving end·, through which your mind can be
affected in a certain way by the presence of some object.
Your intelligence or rationality is the faculty through which
you can represent things that aren’t of a kind that can
come before your senses. The object of sensibility is the
sensible; anything that can’t be known [see Glossary] except
through intelligence is intelligible. The ancient philosophers
called a sensible thing a phenomenon and an intelligible
thing a noumenon. Knowledge that is subject to the laws of
sensuality is sensitive; in so far as it is subject to the laws of
intelligence it is intellectual or rational [see Glossary].
4. Thus, the sensitive element in knowledge depends on
your special character—on your being able to be changed by
the presence of objects, and on what objects produce what
changes in you. But any knowledge that isn’t affected by
such subjective conditions—·i.e. that doesn’t vary according
to what state you are in·—is ·entirely objective, meaning that
it is· strictly and solely concerned with the object, ·i.e. whatever it is that the knowledge is knowledge about·. 