
Section One
Happy Outlook for Imminent Perpetual Peace
From the Lowest Level of Man’s Living Nature
to his Highest, that of Philosophy
Chrysippus says, in his pithy Stoic way1 “Nature has given the pig a
8 413
soul, instead of salt, so that he should not become rotten.” Now this is
the lowest level of man’s nature, prior to all cultivation, namely that of
mere animal instinct. But it seems as if here the philosopher has thrown
a prophetic glance into the physiological systems of our own day; save
only that now, instead of the word ‘soul’, we have taken to using that
of living force (and rightly so, since from an effect we can certainly infer
to the force that produces it, but not forthwith to a substance specially
adapted to this type of effect); we locate life, therefore, in the action of
animating forces (life-impulse) and the ability to react to them (livingcapacity), and call that man healthy in whom a proportionate stimulus
produces neither an excessive nor an altogether too small effect while
conversely, the animalic operation of nature will pass over into a chemical
one, which has decay as its consequence, so that it is not (as used to be
thought) decay that must follow from and after death, but death that
must follow from the preceding decay. Now here nature is presented in
man even prior to his humanity, and thus in its generality, just as it acts
in the beast, merely in order to evolve forces which can subsequently
turn man to laws of freedom; though this activity and its arousal are not
practical, but still merely mechanical.
A
On the Physical Causes of Man’s Philosophy
In addition to the property of self-consciousness, by which man is to be
8 414
distinguished above all other animals, and in virtue of which he is a
rational animal (to whom also, owing to the unity of consciousness,
only one soul can be attributed), there is also the itch to use this power
for trifling, and thereafter to trifle methodically and even by concepts
alone, i.e., to philosophize; and then also to grate polemically upon others
with one’s philosophy, i.e., to dispute, and since this does not readily
happen without emotion, to squabble on behalf of one’s philosophy, and
finally, united in masses against one another (school against school, as
contending armies) to wage open warfare; this itch, I say, or rather drive,
will have to be viewed as one of the beneficent and wise arrangements
of Nature, whereby she seeks to protect man from the great misfortune
of decaying in the living flesh.
453
On the Physical Effect of Philosophy
It is the health (status salubritatis) of reason, as effect of philosophy. But
since human health (by the above) is an incessant sickening and recovery,
the mere dietary of practical reason (a sort of gymnastics thereof) is not
yet sufficient to preserve the equilibrium which we call health, and which
is poised upon a knife-edge; philosophy must also act (therapeutically)
as a medicine (materia medica), for the use of which we need dispensaries
and doctors (though the latter are alone entitled to prescribe such use); in
which connection the authorities must be vigilant to see that it is qualified physicians who profess to advise what philosophy should be studied,2 and
not mere amateurs, who thereby practice quackery in an art of which they
know not the first elements.
An example of the power of philosophy as a medication was given by
the Stoic philosopher Posidonius,3 through an experiment conducted on
his own person in the presence of Pompey the Great (Cicero Tusculan
Disputations, Bk. 2, sec. 61), in that by contending vehemently against the
Epicurean school he overcame a violent attack of gout, demonstrated it
8 415 down into his feet, did not allow it to reach heart or head, and thus gave
proof of the immediate physical effect of philosophy, which nature intends
thereby (physical health), in that he declaimed upon the proposition that
pain is nothing bad.*
On the Seeming Incompatibility of Philosophy with
a Permanent State of Peace in the Subject
Dogmatism (e.g., that of the Wolfian school) is a pillow to fall asleep on,
and an end to all vitality, which latter is precisely the benefit conferred
* The ambiguity in the terms evil (malum) and bad (pravum) is more easily prevented in Latin than in Greek. In regard to well-being and evil (of pain), man,
like all sensuous beings, is subject to the law of nature, and is merely passive; in
regard to bad (and good) he is under the law of freedom. The former contains
what man suffers, the latter what he freely does. In regard to fate, the difference
between right and left ( fato vel dextro vel sinistro) is a mere difference in man’s
relations. But in regard to his freedom, and the relationship of the law to his
inclinations, it is a difference within him. In the first case the straight is contrasted to the slanting (rectum obliquo); in the second, the straight to the crooked
or maimed (rectum pravo, sive varo, obtorto).
That the Romans placed an unlucky event on the left side may well be because one is not so well able to ward off an attack with the left hand as with the
right. But when, in auguries, the auspex, having turned his face southward to
the so-called temple, declared happy the lightning-flash that occurred on the
left, the reason seems to have been that the thunder-god, who was imagined
facing the auspex, would then carry his bolt in the right hand.
454
by philosophy. Skepticism, which when fully set out represents the exact
counterpart of this, has nothing with which it can exert influence upon a
nimble reason, since it lays everything aside unused. Moderatism, which
proceeds from halfway, and thinks to find the philosopher’s stone in
subjective probability, and by piling up a mass of isolated reasons (none in
themselves probative) purports to supply the want of sufficient reason,
is no philosophy at all; and with this medicine (of doxology) it is much
as with plague-drops or Venetian theriac,4 that owing to the all-toomany good things that are flung into them, right and left, they are good for
nothing.
On the Real Compatibility of the Critical Philosophy with
a Permanent State of Peace in the Subject
Critical philosophy is that which sets out to conquer, not by attempts
8 416
to build or overthrow systems, or even (like moderatism) to put up a
roof, but no house, on stilts, for temporary accommodation, but rather
by investigating the power of human reason (for whatever purpose), and
so does not engage in vacuous hair-splitting on the subject of philosophemes that can have no basis in any possible experience. But now
there actually is something in human reason, which can be known to
us by no experience, and yet proves its reality and truth in effects that
are presentable in experience, and thus can also (by an a priori principle, indeed) be absolutely commanded. This is the concept of freedom, and of the law that derives from this, of the categorical, i.e., absolutely commanding, imperative. Through this we acquire Ideas that
would be utterly empty for merely speculative reason, though the latter
inevitably points us towards them as cognitive grounds of our ultimate
purpose – an admittedly only moral and practical reality namely, so to
conduct ourselves as if we were given the objects of these Ideas (God
and immortality), which may therefore be postulated in this (practical)
respect.
This philosophy, which is an outlook ever-armed (against those who
perversely confound appearances with things-in-themselves), and precisely because of this unceasingly accompanies the activity of reason,
offers the prospect of an eternal peace among philosophers, through the
impotence, on the one hand, of theoretical proofs to the contrary, and
through the strength of the practical grounds for accepting its principles
on the other; a peace having the further advantage of constantly activating the powers of the subject, who is seemingly in danger of attack, and
thus of also promoting, by philosophy, nature’s intention of continuously
revitalizing him, and preventing the sleep of death.
From this point of view, the utterance of a man eminent not only
in his own (mathematical) field, but also in many others, and crowned
455
with a productive and still vigorous old age, must be interpreted, not
8 417 as words of ill-omen, but as a felicitation, when he utterly denies to the
philosophers a peace resting comfortably on suppositious laurels;* in that
a peace of that sort would indeed merely enfeeble the powers and defeat
nature’s purpose with regard to philosophy, as a continuing restorative
to the ultimate purpose of mankind; whereas the disposition to contend
is still no war, but rather can and should restrain the latter, and so assure
peace, by a decisive preponderance of the practical grounds over those
on the other side.
Hyperphysical Basis of Man’s Life, for Purposes
of a Philosophy thereof
By means of reason, the soul of man is endowed with a spirit (mens, ?o?s ˜ ),
so that he may lead a life adapted, not merely to the mechanism of nature
and its technico-practical laws, but also to the spontaneity of freedom and
its morally-practical laws. This life-principle is not founded on concepts
of the sensible, which collectively begin by presupposing science, i.e., theoretical knowledge (prior to any practical use of reason); it proceeds
initially and at once from an Idea of the super-sensible, namely freedom,
and from the morally categorical imperative of which the latter first informs us; and thereby forms the basis of a philosophy whose teaching
is not, say (like mathematics), a good instrument (or tool for arbitrary
purposes), and thus a mere means, but a doctrine which it is in itself a
duty to make into a principle.
What is Philosophy, as the Doctrine which, of all Sciences,
Constitutes Man’s Greatest Need
It is that which its name already indicates the Pursuit of Wisdom. But
8 418 wisdom is the concordance of the will to the ultimate purpose (the highest
good); and since this, so far as it is attainable, is also a duty, and conversely,
if it is a duty, must also be attainable, and since such a law of actions is
called moral, it follows that wisdom for man will be nothing else but the
inner principle of willing to obey moral laws, of whatever kind the object
of this willing may be; but that object will on every occasion be supersensible, because a will determined by an empirical object can certainly
be the basis for a technico-practical obedience to a rule, but not for a
duty (which is a nonphysical relationship).
* “Henceforth forever wars shall cease
By acting as the sage avers;
And then will all men live in peace
Except for the philosophers.” A. Kastner ¨ 5
456
On the Super-sensible Objects of Our Knowledge
They are God, Freedom, and Immortality. 1. God, as the being to whom
all duties are owed; 2. Freedom, as man’s power to uphold the pursuit
of his duties (as if they were divine commands) against all the might of
nature; 3. Immortality, as a state in which man’s weal or woe is to be
allotted to him in proportion to his moral worth. We see that together
they stand linked, as it were, like the three propositions of a rational
argument to be worked out; and since, precisely because they are Ideas
of the super-sensible, no objective reality can be attached to them in a
theoretical respect, it will be possible, if such a reality has nevertheless
to be imputed to them, to grant it to them only in a practical respect, as
postulates * of morally-practical reason.
So because its existence is contained in the categorical imperative,
which admits of no doubt, the middle of these three Ideas, namely that
of freedom, brings in the other two in its wake; in that as the supreme principle of wisdom, and thus presupposing also the ultimate purpose of the
most perfect will (the highest blessedness in accordance with morality), 8 419
it contains merely the conditions under which alone this purpose can be
fulfilled. For the being who is alone able to carry out this proportionate
distribution is God; and the state in which this consummation can alone
be assigned to rational creatures, in full accordance with that purpose, is
the assumption of a continuance of life already founded in their nature,
i.e., immortality. For if the continuance of life were not so founded, it
would signify merely the hope of a future life, and not one necessarily to
be presupposed by reason (in consequence of the moral imperative).
Result
It is thus a mere misunderstanding, or a confusion of the morallypractical principles of ethics with those of theory – of which only the
former can provide knowledge as to the super-sensible – if a quarrel is still
raised about what philosophy affirms, as a doctrine of wisdom; and from
this, since nothing else of any consequence will or can be objected to it,
we may with good reason
predict the imminent conclusion of a treaty of perpetual peace in philosophy.
* A postulate is a practical imperative, given a priori, which admits of no explanation of its possibility (and hence of no proof ). Thus we postulate, not things,
or in general the existence of any object, but only a maxim (or rule) of the action
of a subject. Now if it is a duty to work toward a certain purpose (the highest
good), I must also be entitled to assume that the conditions are present under
which alone this performance of duty is possible, notwithstanding that they are
super-sensible, and that we are incapable of obtaining any knowledge of them
(in a theoretical respect).
457
Section Two
Dubious Outlook for Imminent Perpetual
Peace in Philosophy
To find respite, in a yet-not-inactive leisure, from the duty of administering the law at the behest of authority, Herr Schlosser, a man of great
literary talent and (as we have reason to believe) a mind attuned to promotion of the good, has made an unexpected sally on to the battlefield of
metaphysics, where there is far more traffic in bitterness than in the arena
he had just left. The critical philosophy, which he believes himself to
know, though he has only looked at the final results proceeding from it,
and which – since he had not progressed with careful diligence through
the steps that lead thither – he was necessarily bound to misunderstand,
filled him with disgust; and so, without having first gone to school himself, he forthwith became the teacher “of a young man who (he says)
wanted to study the critical philosophy,” in order to advise him against
8 420 doing so.
His only concern is to thrust aside the critique of pure reason wherever possible. His counsel is like the assurance of those good friends
who proposed to the sheep that, if only the latter would get rid of the
dogs, they might all live like brothers in continual peace. The pupil
is a plaything in the hands of the master if he listens to this advice
“to fortify his taste (as the latter says) with the authors of antiquity (in
the art of persuasion, on subjective grounds of approval, rather than
the method of securing conviction on objective grounds).” He is then
sure that the pupil will embrace semblance of truth (verisimilitudo) for
likelihood of truth (probabilitas), and probability for certainty, in judgments that can absolutely proceed only a priori from reason. “The raw
barbaric language of the critical philosophy” will then have no appeal to
him; though in actual fact an aestheticist idiom, imported into elementary philosophy, must itself be regarded as barbaric there. He laments
that “all intimations, vistas of the super-sensible, every genius of the
poetic are to have their wings clipped” (if philosophy has anything to do
with it)!
Philosophy, in that part (the theoretical) which contains the theory
of knowledge, and which though largely directed to limiting pretensions
in theoretical knowledge, can on no account be neglected, sees itself
equally obliged, in its practical part, to revert to a metaphysic (of morals),
as a set of merely formal principles of the concept of freedom, before
there is yet any question of the purpose of actions (the matter of willing). Our anticritical philosopher skips this stage, or rather mistakes it so
completely that he quite misunderstands the principle which may serve as
the touchstone of all legitimacy Act on a maxim of which you can simultaneously will that it become a universal law, and gives it a meaning which limits
458
it to empirical conditions, thereby making it unfit to be a canon of pure
morally-practical reason (though such a canon there must be); whereby
he projects himself into a field quite different from that to which this
canon directs him, and draws venturesome conclusions from this.
It is obvious, however, that we are not talking here of a principle of
means to be used for a certain purpose (for in that case it would be a prag- 8 421
matic, not a moral principle); that it is not when the maxim of my willing,
made into a universal law, is in contradiction to someone else’s maxim of
willing, that this is an infallible indication of the moral impossibility of
the action, but rather when it contradicts itself (a thing I can judge by
the principle of contradiction from the mere concept, a priori, without
any empirical reference, e.g., “whether common ownership or private
property is to be adopted into my maxim”). Mere ignorance, and perhaps also a rather mischievous propensity for quibbling, may have been
the source of this attack, which cannot, however, do any damage to the
Proclamation of Perpetual Peace in Philosophy.
For a peace-treaty so constituted that, if only the parties understand
one another, it is at once concluded (without capitulation), can also be
declared settled, or at least near to settlement.
Even though philosophy be presented solely as a doctrine of wisdom
(which is also its true meaning), it cannot be passed over, either, as a
doctrine of knowledge, insofar as this (theoretical) knowledge contains
the elementary concepts employed by pure reason, albeit that it does so
only to make the latter aware of its own limitations. Now it can hardly be
a question, of philosophy in its first meaning, whether there should be
free and open confession of what and whence we actually know in fact of
its objects (sensible and super-sensible), and what we merely presuppose
in a practical respect (since the assumption of such objects is required
for the final purpose of reason).
It may be that not everything is true which a man takes to be so (for
he may err); but in everything he says he must be truthful (he must not
deceive), whether his profession be merely internal (before God), or also
an external one. The violation of this duty of truthfulness is called a
lie; whence there can be not only external lies, but also an internal one,
so that both may occur united together, or also in contradiction to one
another.
But a lie, whether internal or external, is of two kinds 1. when someone gives out as true, what he nevertheless knows to be untrue; and 2. 8 422
when he gives out as certain, what he nevertheless knows himself to be
subjectively uncertain of.
The lie (“from the father of lies, whence all evil in the world hath
come”)6 is the truly vile spot in human nature, however much the tone
of truthfulness is at the same time the customary one, especially in what
459
has to do with the super-sensible (after the example of many Chinese
merchants, who write over their shops in golden letters “No cheating
here”). The commandment Thou shalt not lie (were it even with the
most pious intentions), if most sincerely adopted into philosophy, as a
doctrine of wisdom, would alone be able, not only to procure eternal
peace therein, but also to assure it for all time to come.