Preface
I have chosen a projecta which, from the aspect both of its inherent
difficulty and in relation to religion, is capable of influencing the reader
to adopt an unfavourable prejudice from the very beginning. To discover
the system that connects the great parts of creation in the whole extent
of infinity, to derive the formation of the celestial bodies themselves
and the origin of their motion out of the first state of nature through
mechanical laws: insights such as these would appear to go well beyond
the powers of human reason. From the other side, religion threatens us
with a solemn accusation for the audacity with which one might make
so bold as to ascribe to nature, which is left to itself, such consequences
in which one can rightly become aware of the immediate hand of the
highest being, and is concerned to find protection for the atheist in the
forwardness of such observations. I see all these difficulties clearly, and
yet am not faint of heart. I feel all the power of the obstacles in my way
and do not despair. I have dared to undertake a dangerous journey on the
basis of a slight supposition and already see the foothills of new lands.
Those who have the courage to pursue the exploration, will step onto
those lands and have the pleasure of bestowing their own name upon
them.
I did not set out upon this enterprise until I saw myself secure in
relation to the duties of religion. My eagerness was redoubled when I
1:222 saw that with every step the mists dispersed whose darkness seemed to
hide monsters; and after they parted, the glory of the highest being shone
forth with the most vivid brilliance. Since I know these efforts to be free
of all reproach, I will sincerely adduce anything that well-intentioned,
but also weak minds might find offensive in my plan, and am prepared to
submit it to the severity of the orthodox Areopagus7 with the frankness
that is characteristic of an honest disposition. The champion of faith may
nonetheless make his reasons heard first.
If the universeb with all its order and beauty is merely an effect of matter left to its general laws of motion, if the blind mechanism of the powers
of nature knows how to develop so magnificently and to such perfection
all of its own accord: then the proof of the divine Author, which one
derives from the sight of the beauty of the universe, is entirely stripped
of its power, nature is sufficient in itself, divine government is superfluous, Epicure lives again in the middle of Christendom, and an unholy
philosophy tramples faith under foot, which hands that philosophy a
bright light to illuminate it.
a Vorwurf b Weltbau
194
If I had found this objection well-founded, the conviction I have
regarding the infallibility of divine truths is so powerfulc in me that
I would consider everything that contradicts them to be sufficiently
disproved and would reject it. It is, however, precisely the agreement
between my system and religion that raises my confidence to a fearless
serenity in the face of all difficulties.
I am aware of the entire value of those proofs that are adduced from the
beauty and perfect arrangement of the universe to confirm a most wise
Author. If one is not arbitrarily opposed to all convincing arguments,
one must hand the victory to such incontrovertible reasons. I, however,
maintain that the defenders of religion, by using these reasons in a bad
way, will perpetuate the argument with the naturalists,8 offering a weak
flank without any need to do so.
People are accustomed to note and emphasize the harmony, the
beauty, the purposes, and a perfect correspondence of the means to 1:223
them in nature. But, by elevating nature from this perspective, one also
seeks to lower it from another perspective. This harmony, people say,
is foreign to it; left to its own universal laws, nature would bring about
nothing but disorder. These harmonies point to a foreign hand that has
been able to force a wise plan onto matter devoid of all regularity. But I
answer: If the universal laws of causation of matter are also a result of the
highest plan, then they can presumably have no purpose other than that
which strives to fulfil of their own accord that plan which the highest
wisdom has set itself; or, if this is not the case, one ought not to fall into
the temptation of believing that at least matter and its universal laws are
independent and that the wisest power, which has been able to use the
laws in so laudable a fashion, is great yet not infinite, powerful yet not
entirely self-sufficient.
The defender of religion is concerned that those harmonies that can be
explained by a natural tendency of matter can be said to prove the independence of nature from divine providence. He admits it quite clearly:
that if natural causes can be discovered for all the order in the universe
that can be brought about by the most general and most essential properties of matter, then it is not necessary to invoke a highest governing
power. The naturalist finds his satisfaction by not disputing this premise.
But he unearths examples that prove the fruitfulness of the universal laws
of nature by means of perfectly beautiful consequences, and with such
grounds, which could become invincible weapons in his hands, he puts
the orthodox believer into danger. I will quote some examples. It has
frequently been cited as one of the clearest proofs of a beneficent providence watching over human beings that in the hottest regions of the
c
vermogend ¨
195
earth, sea breezes waft across the heated land and refresh it at just the
time when it is most in need of them, almost as though they had been
ordered. For example, on the island of Jamaica, as soon as the sun has
risen to the point where it throws its greatest heat onto the land, soon
after 9 o’clock in the morning, a wind begins to rise from the sea which
blows across the land from all sides; its strength increases in relation to
1:224 the height of the sun. At one o’clock in the afternoon, when it is naturally
hottest, the wind is strongest and gradually decreases with the setting of
the sun so that in the evening the same stillness prevails as at sunrise.
Without this desirable arrangement, this island would be uninhabitable.
This same relief is enjoyed by all the coasts of countries in hot zones.
They are also the ones that need it most, because, as they are the lowest lying regions of the dry land, they are subject to the greatest heat;
for the regions that are situated higher up, where this sea breeze does
not reach, do not need it as much, since their more elevated situation
places them in a cooler region. Is all this not beautiful, are these not
visible purposes achieved by cleverly applied means? But in opposition,
the naturalist must find the natural causes of this in the most universal
properties of the air without being able to presume special arrangements
for this reason. He observes correctly that these sea breezes must make
such periodic motions even if there were no human beings living on the
island, that is, as a result of no property of the air other than what is
inevitably necessary for the growth of plants, even without any intention
in relation to this, namely a result of its elasticity and mass. The heat of
the sun cancels out the balancing effect of the air by making that which
is over land thinner and thus causes the cooler sea air to raise it from its
position and occupy its place.
In any case, what benefits do the winds not have for the good of the
globe, and what uses does the astuteness of man not make of them! There
are, however, no arrangements necessary to bring them about other than
that same universal character of the air and of heat which must have been
present on the Earth irrespective of these purposes.
At this point, the free thinker says: admit that if useful constitutions
directed at particular purposes can be derived from the most universal
and simple laws of nature without any necessity for any special government by a highest wisdom, then see now the proofs which will catch
you by your own admission. All nature, especially unorganized nature,
is full of such proofs which show that matter, which determines itself
through the mechanism of its forces, has a certain rightness in its con-
1:225 sequences and satisfies the rules of propriety without being forced to. If
a well-intentioned person were to try to dispute this capacity of the universal laws of nature in order to save the good cause of religion, then he
will place himself into an embarrassing situation and give the unbeliever
cause to triumph through a bad defence.
196
But let us see how these reasons, which are feared as being harmful
in the hands of one’s enemies, are instead powerful weapons to dispute
them. Matter, which determines itself through its most universal laws,
by its natural behaviour or, if one wishes to call it so, by a blind mechanism, creates good consequences that appear to be the plan of a highest
wisdom. Air, water, and heat, if one observes them left to their own
devices, cause winds and clouds, rain, rivers that bring moisture to the
lands, and all those useful consequences without which nature would
necessarily remain sad, empty, and barren. However, they do not bring
those consequences by some mere chance or accident that might just as
easily have turned out to be detrimental, but rather, we see that they
are limited by their natural laws to have this and no other effect. What
are we to think of this harmony? How could it be possible that things
of different natures in connection with one another should aim to bring
about such excellent harmonies and beauty, even for the purposes of such
things which are located, as it were, outside the range of dead matter,
that is, to the benefit of human beings and animals, if they did not have a
common origin, that is, an infinite reason, in which the essential natures
of all things were conceived in relation to each other? If their natures
were necessary for themselves and independently of each other, what
amazing chance, or rather, what an impossibility it would be, that their
natural endeavours should fit them together in such a way as a deliberate
clever choice could have united them.
Now I will confidently apply this to my current purpose. I assume the
matter of the whole world to be universally dispersed and I make complete chaos out of it. I see matter form in accordance with the established
laws of attraction and modify its motion through repulsion. Without the
assistance of any arbitrary inventions, I enjoy the pleasure of seeing the 1:226
creation of a well-ordered whole by reason of established laws of motion
which looks so much like the system of the world we have before our
eyes that I cannot help but regard it as the same. This unexpected development of the order of nature on a large scale initially seems suspicious
to me because it bases such a composite rightness on such a poor and
simple foundation. Finally, I instruct myself from the aforementioned
observation that such a development of nature is not something unheard
of, but that its essential endeavour necessarily brings with it such a development, and that this is the most magnificent evidence of its dependence
on that original being which contains within itself even the origins of
beings themselves and their first laws of causation.d This insight redoubles my trust in the proposal I have made. My confidence increases with
every step I take forward and my timidity ceases completely.
d Wirkungsgesetze
197
But the defence of your system, people will say, is also the defence of
Epicure’s opinions, which have the greatest similarity with them. I do not
reject all agreement with him. Many have become atheists through the
semblancee of such reasons, which, on closer consideration, could have
convinced them most powerfully of the certainty of the highest being.
The consequences a confused understanding draws from the most faultless principles are often very faulty, and this was the case with Epicure’s
conclusions, even though his conception was in accord with the keenness
of a great mind.
I will therefore not deny that Lucretius’ theory or that of his predecessors, Epicure, Leucippus, and Democritus, has much in common with
mine. Like those philosophers, I posit a first state of nature as a universal
dispersion of the original material of all world-bodies, or atoms as they
call them. Epicure posited a heaviness that caused these elementary particles to fall and this does not seem to be very different to Newtonian
attraction, which I accept; he also accorded them a certain deviation from
the straight linear motion of their fall, even though he had absurd notions
of their causes and effects: This deviation to some extent corresponds
1:227 to the change in the straight fall that we attribute to the repulsive force
of the particles; finally, the whirlpools that arose out of the perturbedf
motion of the atoms were a centrepiece of the theories of Leucippus and
Democritus, and they will also be found in ours. The close relationship
with a doctrine that was the proper theory of the denial of the divine in
antiquity, will not, however, drag mine into association with their errors.
Even in the most senseless opinions that have succeeded in gaining the
applause of men, we will always find some truth. One false principle or a
few ill-considered connecting principles will lead men from the path of
truth via imperceptible errors right into the abyss. Despite the similarity
I have just mentioned, there does nonetheless remain one basic difference between ancient cosmogony and the current one, which allows us
to draw quite opposite conclusions from the latter.
The aforementioned teachers of the mechanical origins of the
universeg derived all the order that could be perceived in it from the
accidental chance that made the atoms come together so fortuitously
that they constituted a well-ordered whole. Epicure was even so impudent that he insisted that the atoms deviated from their straight motion
without any reason in order to be able to encounter one another. All of
them together took this nonsense to the point that they made this blind
coincidence the origin of all living creatures and really derived reason
from the lack of reason.9 In my theory, however, I find that matter is
e Schein
f verwirrten
g Weltbaues
198
tied to certain necessary laws. In their complete dissolution and dispersion, I see a beautiful and orderly whole develop quite naturally. This
does not happen through accident and by chance, but rather one can
see that natural properties bring it about in a necessary fashion. Does
not this move one to ask: Why did matter have to have precisely such
laws as have order and propriety as their purpose? Was it really possible
that many things, each of which has a nature independent of the others,
should determine each other by themselves in precisely such a way that
a well-ordered whole emerges from it, and if they do this, does this not
provide an undeniable proof of their common first origin, which must
be an all-sufficient highest mind in which the natures of things were 1:228
designed in accordance with unified purposes?
Matter, which is the original materialh of all things, is thus bound by
certain laws, and if it is left freely to these laws, it must necessarily bring
forth beautiful combinations. It is not at liberty to deviate from this plan
of perfection. Since, therefore, it is subject to a most wise purpose, it
must necessarily have been placed into such harmonious connections by
a first cause that ruled over it, and a God exists precisely because nature
cannot behave in any way other than in a regular and orderly manner, even in
chaos.
I have such a good opinion of the honest attitude of those who do
my proposal the honour of examining it that I consider myself assured
that the reasons mentioned will at least put the purity of my intention
beyond doubt, even if they do not yet remove all concerns about the
harmful consequences of my system. If, notwithstanding this, there are
spiteful zealots who regard it as a worthy duty of their holy calling to
attach harmful interpretations to the most innocent opinions, then I am
sure that their judgement will have an effect on all reasonable people
that is exactly the opposite of their intention. Furthermore, I will not
be deprived of the right that Descartes always enjoyed from fair judges
when he dared to explain the formation of the heavenly bodies from
purely mechanical laws. I will therefore quote the authors of the universal history of the world:* “We, however, cannot but believe that the
attempt by this philosopher, who attempts to explain the formation of
the world over a certain period of time from chaotic matter by the simple
continuation of a motion once impressed on it and has reduced this to a
few simple and universal laws of motion, just as little as others who have
since then and with much applause tried to do the same thing from the original and created properties of matter, is punishable or demeaning of God
* Part I, §88.
h Urstoff
199
as many have imagined, because instead, a higher conception of his infinite
wisdom is brought about by this means.”10
1:229 I have attempted to remove the difficulties that appeared to threaten
my propositions from the point of view of religion. There are several that
are no less significant in relation to the matter itself. If it is true, people
will say, that God has placed into the forces of nature a secret ability to
form itself out of chaos into a perfect world constitution,i then will the
mind of man, which is so weak in relation to the lowest things, be capable
of investigating the hidden properties in so great a subject matterj? Such
an endeavourk is the same as if one were to say: just give me matter and
I will build you a world out of it. Cannot the weakness of your insights,
which is made as nought by the slightest things that occur near you every
day, teach you that it is futile to try to discover the immeasurable and
what took place in nature even before the world existed? I shall destroy
this difficulty by demonstrating clearly that of all the investigations that
could be raised in the study of nature, this is the one in which one can
most easily and most surely reach back as far as its beginning. Just as
of all the tasks facing research into nature, none has been resolved with
greater accuracy and certainty than the true constitution of the universel
on the large scale, the laws of motion, and the internal mechanism of
the orbits of all the planets into which Newtonian philosophy can give
such insights as can be found in no other part of philosophy: just so, I
maintain, that of all the things in nature whose first cause we can investigate, the origin of the world systemm and the generation of the heavenly
bodies together with the causes of their motions is the one which we
might first hope to understand thoroughly and reliably. The reason for
this is simple to see. The heavenly bodies are spherical masses, that is,
of the simplest form that any body can have whose origin one seeks.
Their motion is similarly unmixed. It is nothing other than a free continuation of a tangential force11 once impressed,n which, combined with
the attraction of the body in the centre, becomes circular. Furthermore,
the space in which they move is empty, the distances separating them
are quite uncommonly great and thus all are placed most clearly separate from one another both in unimpededo motion and for the clear
1:230 observation of it. It seems to me that in a certain sense one could say
here without being presumptuous: Give me matter and I will build a world
out of it, that is, give me matter and I will show you how a world is to
come into being out of it. Because if matter endowed with an essential
i Weltverfassung
j Vorwurfe
k Unterfangen
l Verfassung des Weltbaues
m Weltsystems
n eines einmal eingedruckten Schwunges ¨
o unverwirrten
200
attractive force is present, then it is not difficult to determine those causes
that can have contributed to the arrangement of the world system,p
viewed on the large scale. We know what is necessary for a body to
achieve a spherical shape, we understand what is required for freefloating spheres to adopt a circular motion around the centre point to
which they are attracted. The position of the orbits in relation to each
other, the coincidence of the direction, the eccentricity, all this can be
reduced to the simplest mechanical causes, and we can confidently hope
to discover them because they can be posited on the simplest and clearest
grounds. But can we claim such advantages about the most insignificant
plant or insect? Are we in a position to say: Give me matter and I will show
you how a caterpillar can be created? Do we not get stuck at the first step due
to ignorance about the true inner nature of the object and the complexity
of the diversity contained in it? It should therefore not be thought strange
if I dare to say that we will understand the formation of all the heavenly bodies, the cause of their motion, in short, the origin of the whole
present constitution of the universeq sooner than the creation of a single
plant or caterpillar becomes clearly and completely known on mechanical
grounds.
These are the reasons upon which I base my confidence that the physical part of cosmologyr may in future hope for that completeness to
which Newton raised its mathematical half. Next to the laws governing
the universes in its current constitution, there are perhaps no others in
the whole of research on nature capable of being so determined mathematically as those according to which it came about, and without doubt
the hand of a practised mathematician would cultivate fruitful fields
here.
After I have made the effort to commend a favourable reception for
the subjectt of my observations, I may be allowed briefly to explain the 1:231
way in which I have treated it. The first part is concerned with a new
system of the structure of the universeu on the large scale. Herr Wright
of Durham,12 with whose treatise I became acquainted through the
Hamburg Freie Urteile of the year 1751,13 first gave me cause to regard
the fixed stars not as a scattered milling mass without any visible order,
but rather as a system with the greatest similarity to a planetary one, so
that, just as in the latter the planets are very close to a common plane,
so also the fixed stars in their position relate as closely as possible to
a certain plane, which has to be thought of as extending through the
entire heavens, and where they are most densely massed, they form the
p Weltsystems
q Weltbau
r Weltwissenschaft
s Weltbau
t Vorwurf
u Weltgebaude ¨
201
bright band that is called the Milky Way. I have become convinced that,
because this zone, illuminated by countless suns, has very exactly the
direction of a very large circle, our sun must also be very close to this
large plane of reference. While pursuing the causes of this feature, I
have found the following to be very probable: that the fixed stars could
actually be slowly moving planets of a higher order. As confirmation of
what will be found about this thought in its proper place, I will quote
here just one section of Herr Bradley’s treatise on the motion of fixed
stars.14 “If a judgement may be formed, <with regard to this matter,>
from the result of the comparison of our best modern observations, with
such as were formerly made with any tolerable degree of exactness; there
appears to have been a real change in the position of some of the fixed
stars with respect to each other; and such, as seems independent of any
motion in our own system, and can only be referred to some motion in
the stars themselves. Arcturus affords a strong proof of this. For if its
present declination be compared with its place, as determined either by
Tycho or Flamsteed, the difference will be found to be much greater
than what can be suspected to arise from the uncertainty of their observations. It is reasonable to expect that other instances of the like kind
must also occur among the great number of visible stars; because their
1:232 relative positions may be altered by various means. For if our own solar
system be conceived to change its place with respect to absolute space,
this might, in process of time, occasion an apparent change in the angular
distances of the fixed stars; and in such a case, the places of the nearest
stars being more affected, than of those that are very remote; their relative positions might seem to alter; tho’ the stars themselves were really
immoveable. And on the other hand, if our own system be at rest and
any of the stars really in motion, this might likewise vary their apparent
positions; and the more so, the nearer they are to us, <or the swifter
their motions are,> or the more proper the direction of the motion is,
to be rendered visible by us. Since then the <relative> places of the
stars may be changed from such a variety of causes, considering the
amazing distances at which it is certain that some of them are placed,
it may require the observation of many ages, to determine the laws of
the apparent changes, even of a single star; much more difficult therefore must it be, to settle the laws relating to all the most remarkable
stars.”v,15
I cannot determine exactly the borders between the system of Herr
Wright and my own and in what ways I have merely imitated his model
or have explained it further. But acceptable reasons presented themselves
to me afterwards to extend it considerably in one direction.